Tensions are rising over the future of the Black Sea grain corridor with Russia claiming that the corridor is suspended and Ukraine insisting it is committed to its continuation.
After Russia decided to suspend its participation in the grain agreement over the weekend the United Nations Turkey and Ukraine agreed on the further movement of merchant shipping through the corridor for Monday.
Ukraine has not commented on the drone attacks against Sevastopol.
Ukraine war updates: Russia drops grain deal claiming drones hit its ships (Oct
As the week begins heres a look ahead and a roundup of key developments from the past week.
What to watch this week
Another week began with Russia launching a wave of attacks hitting Ukraines capital Kyiv and other areas causing damage including outages in electricity cellphone service water supplies and other destruction.
There will likely be fallout after Russia pulled out of a United Nationsbrokered deal to export Ukrainian grain
Security Council is meeting to discuss the issue Monday.
What happened last week
Progressive Democrats sent then withdrew a letter urging President Biden to seek diplomacy with Russia toward a ceasefire in Ukraine
Thirty members of Congress had signed the letter which caused a backlash including from fellow Democrats but some signatories explained they signed it soon after it was drafted in early summer and much has changed since.
Russia practiced conducting a nuclear strike on Oct
26 in its first big nuclear drill since invading Ukraine this year
The Kremlins defense minister said it was a rehearsal for responding to a nuclear attack
It came as NATO carried out its annual Steadfast Noon nuclear exercises.
President Vladimir Putin repeated the allegation without evidence that Ukraine is preparing to set off a dirty bomb
and allies dismiss this as a false pretext for Russias own possible future actions.
Germanys president acknowledged a bitter failure of his and other governments policies toward Russia
In his national address on Oct 28 President FrankWalter Steinmeier said Russias war has reduced the European security order to ashes.
Russia accused Ukraine of a massive drone attack on its Black Sea fleet and civil ships over the weekend off the coast of Crimea
Moscow also alleged British specialists were involved in directing the drones as well as damaging gas pipelines which London denied.
Russia suspended its role in a deal allowing Ukrainian grain to be exported through the Black Sea citing the alleged drone strikes
The move drew condemnation from Western leaders and the U.N. which brokered the arrangement to ease a global food crisis.
In the battle for Kherson Ukrainian infantry officers say dont underestimate Russia.
Another casualty of Russias war: Some Ukrainians no longer trust their neighbors.
Russia is suspending a Ukraine grain export deal that has helped keep food prices down.
Understanding the Biden administrations approach to diplomacy with Russia.
Keep up with Ukraines demand for weaponry?
Putin makes an unsubstantiated claim that Ukraine has plans to use a dirty bomb.
Congress considers support for Ukraines war effort.
Progressive Democrats withdraw letter calling for more diplomatic efforts with Russia.
Leaving Russia to avoid war in Ukraine.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
For context and more indepth stories you can find more of NPRs coverage here
A series of missile strikes hit major Ukrainian cities on Monday morning with the capital Kyiv and cities to the northeast and south being targeted according to regional officials.
Kyivs Mayor Vitali Klitschko said on Telegram that part of the capital had been cut off by the strikes which he said had hit critical infrastructure facilities
There is no water supply in some areas he said.
Meanwhile global wheat prices have started to rise following Russias withdrawal from the Black Sea grain export deal last weekend.
Russia announced Saturday that it was suspending its involvement in the Black Sea Grain Initiative that was brokered in July and which allowed vital agricultural products to be exported from several Ukrainian ports.
The UN and Turkey which help broker the deal said they were working with Russia and Ukraine to help move ships stuck within the maritime corridor being used in the initiative.
The two sides were bogged down in an extended stalemate freeing Western leaders from making difficult choices or thinking too hard about the future of the conflict
Since the start of the war the Biden administration has effectively maintained a balanced realpolitik approach: arming and funding Ukraine yet continuing to make clear that the United States will not engage directly in the conflict
But the administration has avoided talking about one crucial area of war strategy altogether: how it might end
But nearly all wars end in negotiations
The global economic costs of the conflict are already enormous and will almost certainly increase with the onset of winter
It must think through the right timing to push for negotiations and at what point the costs of continuing to fight will outweigh the benefits
If the administration does not prepare soon it may find its carefully calibrated response to the war being overtaken by a dangerous fantasy of absolute victory.
The administration has also carefully avoided talking about what comes next claiming that it is up to Ukrainians to decide what is in their best interest
But maintaining that position is becoming more difficult now that Russian President Vladimir Putin has doubled down on the war and made blatant nuclear threats against the West
Putin has chosen to take significant new risks rather than to back down suggesting that this war will not end through simple Russian capitulation
Though these risks seem manageable for now the time may come when negotiations are necessary to forestall catastrophe.
At the same time the economic fallout of the war is rapidly growing
In Ukraine public finances have been ravaged; the country is running out of cash
In reality the question is not whether negotiations are needed to end the war but when and how they should unfold
To lay the groundwork for a settlement American policymakers must act to ensure that Ukrainian American and European interests do not diverge
Ukrainian interests are not necessarily identical to those of its Western partners
European states are bearing substantial economic costs from the war
And any risk of escalation or nuclear exchange poses a direct threat to the West itself
This does not mean that the West should push Ukraine to concede as some have argued
But it does suggest that the United States and its partners should provide future aid with an eye to putting Ukraine in the best negotiating position not simply continuing the war
These goals should be narrow by design: rather than trying to retake all of its pre2014 territory or to punish Russian leaders Ukraine should pursue objectives that are less likely to produce dramatic escalation and more likely to result in a durable peace
Washington should encourage pursuing those objectives and should also make clear to Kyiv at least in private where the limits of American support lie and what the White House perceives as unacceptable escalation risks
Setting clear expectations now reduces the risk of misperception in Kyiv.
American policymakers must also consider Ukrainian and Russian domestic politics since internal support in both countries will be vital to making any settlement last
History suggests that a power transition in Moscow is possible but by no means likely or inevitable
Thus policymakers need to focus on Putin and the small group of elites around him and consider what settlement they might be willing to accept
But like many other authoritarians before him he can sell a poor result as a win
This means that it may be possible to find some facesaving deal in which de facto realities such as Russian legal control of Crimea could be recognized and which the Kremlin could portray to the Russian public as genuine concessions by the West.
In Kyiv Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky faces a more open contentious political environment as the divisions of Ukrainian politics begin to reemerge
Nonetheless he faces a similar dilemma
After asking so much of Ukrainians the Ukrainian government will find it difficult to compromise in any way that seems to reward the enemy
If Zelensky accepts an unpopular settlement it could lead to his defeat at the ballot box
In these circumstances a deal in which Ukrainians feel that they have largely triumphed is more likely to succeed
This makes it all the more important to manage expectations now
Washington should encourage Kyiv to take a more moderate stance on issues such as Crimea that are likely to figure in a future settlement; to tone down triumphalist talk; and to emphasize the economic rewards that Ukraine stands to receive through international reconstruction aid and European economic integration under a settlement.
Policymakers should set clear basic parameters for a settlement but have significant flexibility in many details
A few points are nonnegotiable
But there are other issues on which flexibility is possible
Final territorial borders for example may be determined partly by military gains on the ground
Policymakers should not be irrevocably devoted to the preFebruary 24 or even pre2014 status quo
And in general policymakers should seek to prioritize practical outcomes over abstract principles
An independent sovereign Ukraine that can defend itself and integrate economically with Europe for example would be far preferable to a Ukraine with permanent territorial disputes within its borders
The situation in Ukraine remains dynamic; U.S
policymakers should avoid tying their own hands now with declarations that may be hard to achieve in practice.
Meanwhile sanctions relief is likely to be one of the most important but politically fraught parts of any negotiation for Western policymakers
Sanctions tend to turn into permanent features of international politics even though their economic and political impact weakens over time
They are therefore often more useful as bargaining chips than as permanent punishment
Policymakers should think carefully now about how to use sanctions relief to obtain Russian concessions
Some sanctions relief for Russia will likely be a prerequisite for a successful peace deal but policymakers should think carefully about which sanctions are worth lifting
There are three circumstances in which it may make sense for the United States to push for a settlement
The first is if Ukrainian forces continue to achieve significant success and leadership in Kyiv begins to talk about liberating Crimea
The second is if Russian forces regain the initiative and retake significant territory particularly if they begin to advance out of the Donbas
The third is if the two sides become locked in another stalemate with neither able to regain the advantage
In such a situation the United States Europe and even Ukraine and Russia may conclude that it is no longer worth bearing the substantial costs of continuing the war.
At first glance it may seem strange that U.S
policymakers should consider a settlement when Ukraine is winning when it is losing and when it is doing neither
And each of the situations outlined above would likely produce wildly different settlements
But what connects all three is that in each battlefield outcomes point to a relative consensus around which a settlement could be built
Today the battlefield is still dynamic; both parties think they are going to triumph
A settlement will become possible only when the outcome on the battlefield becomes more apparent
Until then robust Western support can help ensure that the first of these scenarios is the most likely.
Recent airstrikes against Kyiv and other major Ukrainian cities suggest that Russia may be contemplating greater escalation
There are substantial risks and costs to a widening conflict; even if it is not yet the time to negotiate policymakers need to explore now the circumstances under which the United States would push for an end to the war
They should think through how to effectively leverage sanctions and battlefield gains to put Ukraine in the best position at the negotiating table
And perhaps most important policymakers in Washington should communicate the results of these discussions to Kyiv and to European capitals in order to avoid potentially dangerous divergences in national interest among Ukraine and its Western partners.
Since Russia began its partial mobilization in September thousands of men of military age have fled abroad to avoid being called up for the war in Ukraine
How are their wives coping?
Russias Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu publicly informed President Vladimir Putin last week that Russias partial mobilization which began on September 21 had been completed.
Shoigu said that 300000 citizens had been drafted 82000 of whom had already been sent to Ukraine
As of Monday October 31 Putin had not signed the decree required to officially end mobilization.
Many men who went into hiding to avoid conscription have since left Russia some leaving behind their wives
Three women told DW the stories of how theyve been coping
To keep them safe their names have been changed.
A feeling that everything is going up in flames
Until recently Daria a copywriter from Chelyabinsk in the southeastern Urals had no interest in politics at all
I couldnt bring myself to figure out what was fake and what was real she said
She felt the war was a disaster and tried not to think about it simply blocking out the problem
But when the partial mobilization began Daria became afraid for her husband Alexei
She studied the laws and the couple decided he needed to leave the country.
Since he does not own a passport the plan was to go to Kazakhstan where he could live without travel documents
For nights before his departure Daria could not sleep
She took care of all the preparations including his papers looked for an apartment for her husband and found out the best border crossing to take.
Alexei followed his wifes plan and crossed the border without a hitch
He settled in an apartment in the Kazakh capital Astana where he has found work as a photographer
In terms of work contacts and prospects things are even better there than in Chelyabinsk said Daria.
At the border between Russia and Kazakhstan after partial mobilization was announced Image: DW
She continues to help her husband from afar
She ordered pillows a blanket bedding and a kettle online for his new home and sent a box of warm clothes
The internet does not function well at Alexeis place in Kazakhstan so there are no regular video calls.
Meanwhile Daria has applied for a passport and plans to join her husband soon
She fears the Russian authorities might close the borders because of the imposition of martial law in Donbas
I dont even want to think about the fact that Im here and hes there
Its very hard and sad
We have a great relationship weve been together since 2017 she said adding that the way things are at the moment she is glad they dont have children yet.
The young woman worries about her parents who live in Chelyabinsk
They are patriotic I cant change their minds because they still have to live here she said adding that all the problems her husband faces can be solved in Kazakhstan
Here there is a feeling that everything is going up in flames.
Olga 32: Our son does not yet understand where his daddy is
When Putin ordered a partial mobilization Olga from Murmask in the far north immediately thought the authorities would call up everyone who was ablebodied
She and her husband Artyom decided he should leave the country
His family was not happy about the decision but did not interfere
Artyoms mother has a house in the Donetsk region which she wants to become Russian but with minimal losses
Artyoms father thinks his son should have gone to war.
Olga helped her husband take care of everything that needed to be taken care of in Murmansk
We had to talk to the family and raise money for the trip
We looked for tickets but there were none she said
Russians standing in line in Almaty to be registered as refugees Image: Madija Torebaewa-DW
Artyom left Murmansk on September 27 for Kazakhstan which he reached after two days
At the time he did not know whether Russia would close its borders
Its good that hes gone at least now Im not worried about them catching him and drafting him Olga said
Her husband now has a residence permit in Kazakhstan
He and other men he traveled with share an apartment in Almaty
For now Artyom is looking for opportunities to start his own company.
The couple have a fouryearold son and it is the first time the family has been apart for such a long time
Due to the poor internet connection video calls are rarely possible so they record videos for each other
Our son doesnt understand where his dad is yet
When he sees him in videos he cries and then he wants to talk to him Olga said
He misses his dad.
Can Russians who flee partial mobilization come to Germany? To view this video please enable JavaScript and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video
Olga a kindergarten teacher continues her daily routine at work
Despite all the terrible news youre in a daily rut she said
She wants to join her husband but she finds it hard to give up her life
My husband and I talked about selling the apartment but Im not ready to do that
I dont know what would have to happen for me to give up everything and leave
Probably a rocket would have to hit here first then I would probably run away immediately Olga said.
Elena 41: Women cant stop the war
Elena a psychologist lives in Arkhangelsk in the north of Russia
When news of the partial mobilization hit she and her husband decided that he and their son should flee to Armenia
The couples son was discharged from the Russian army in summer after completing his military service and is a student at a university
When mobilization comes he will be among the first
I dont want to risk my sons life and health Elena said.
When the war started the company Elenas husband does remote work for moved to the Armenian capital Yerevan
Elena was afraid they might not be able to leave Russia before the borders were closed so they set out for the Georgian border on September 24.
These people made it to Georgia in late September Image: Shakh Aivazov-AP-picture alliance
At the time Elena was a kind of logistics center for her son and husband
Before that I was depressed but when solutions presented themselves that gave me a boost of energy she recalled
Her husband and son managed to cross the border in just one day which Elena says has become a family legend.
Now her husband and son are settling in Yerevan getting used to Armenian cuisine
Money transfers can be difficult and it is unclear how her son will continue his studies at the Russian university
Bad things are not happening to our family but to our country she said adding that the family is adjusting and these challenges will not break them but instead make them stronger.
At the end of October Elena plans to visit her husband and son and bring them warm clothes
She is not yet planning to move to Yerevan herself because she is active in Arkhangelsk society and would like to continue to remain there as long as possible.
Concerning the women who send their men to war Elena says they think this war is something like the Great Patriotic War. Women in Russia are less at risk than men she said
We can take the place of men and make decisions that can affect a change in the countrys policy
But women cannot stop the war.
The Russian Ministry of Defense said in a statement Monday that all partial mobilization activities including summons deliveries have been suspended.
Military units will only be accepting volunteers and contractors from now on the statement continued.
Commenting on behalf of the Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu the ministry said that the commanders of military districts and the Northern Fleet were sent orders to submit reports on the completion of partial mobilization activities by November 1.
This can only be done with an official decree from Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Protests have erupted in ethnic minority regions and some military enlistment offices have been set on fire
The original announcement also sparked rare antiwar demonstrations across Russia.
Two gunmen said to be from former Soviet states opened fire on Russian military recruits on October 15 during a training session in the Belgorod region killing 11 people state news agency TASS reported citing the Russian Defense Ministry as a source.
A man opened fire at one such building late last month seriously injuring a commander state media reported.
Countless Russians have fled the country as a result of the partial mobilization
More than 200000 people traveled from Russia into Georgia Kazakhstan and the European Union in just the first week collective data from those regions showed.
The benefits of the mobilization have also been questionable
Firstly Iran appears to be playing a significant role in arming Russia.
Then there is the strong indication Russia has been running very low on its own stock of missiles
And finally this new level of intensity means Ukraine is going to need help from the West if this new influx of missiles is to be stopped.
In recent weeks despite Iranian and Russian denials images of the Shahed136 drones their distinctive delta wings silhouetted against the sky have circulated around the global media.
In Kyiv tower block residents watched in horror as the drones flew below their windows the lawnmowerlike whine of their engines clearly heard as they purposefully made their way to intended targets.
Plunging temperatures Russia hopes will cow and subdue the Ukrainian population.
A type of loitering munition the Shahed136 is not designed to return but to be destroyed on impact a guided flying bomb used by Russia as a cheap cruise missile.
Launched in packs these drones are designed to fly low evading radar.
Their low altitude and slow speed mean they can be shot down by individual soldiers as many have been but they can also be used against frontline positions and are more manoeuvrable than faster missiles.
With their 40kg warheads the Shahed136s which are accurate machines cause significant damage.
Meanwhile in this hightempo conflict with Ukraine that has only run a few months Russia has used up most of its missile inventory.
With the economy still on a peacetime footing there is no quick way to replenish its rapidly dwindling stocks
Russian missiles while advanced are expensive and timeconsuming to make.
With most of the world having either turned against the invading nation or cowed by sanctions from doing business with Russia it has few partners to turn to.
One of the ironies of sanctions against Iran is that it now has a robust militaryindustrial complex with a particular focus on drones and short to mediumrange missiles.
Tehran has steadily improved on domestic designs incrementally increasing range accuracy and survivability of longrange drones loitering munitions and a large and growing arsenal of missiles like the Fateh110 and the more advanced variant the Zolfaghar.
Both are roadmobile and solidfuelled meaning they can emerge from a hidden position and launch within minutes before ducking back under cover.
This makes them more likely to survive any potential conflict.
Their ranges 300500km for the Fatehemobin (an improved version) and 700km for the Zolfaghar make them useful for theatrelevel warfare while their accuracy down to a few metres and constantly being improved allows them to hit specific point targets like bridges command posts and missile batteries.
Questions are being asked at the United Nations Security Council about whether Iran has broken its treaty obligations by actively supporting Russia a pariah on the world stage.
Even so Iran has something to gain.
Though many different models and types of drones and missiles are being manufactured there the true test of any weapon system is the brutal school of combat for which there are no prizes for second place.
This feedback to Iranian analysts and weapons designers will help improve future missiles and drones making them all the more lethal.
So Russia has little option but to import relatively cheap effective Iranian missiles.
So how has Ukraine been impacted?
At the start of the war Ukraine had S300 and Buk air defence systems capable of longrange defence against fastmoving targets and able to tackle slower yet lowaltitude flying cruise missiles.
A protracted intense conflict means Ukraine is also short on sophisticated weapons and is not able to buy replacement missiles in anywhere near the amounts it needs to sustain a campaign.
The recent Russian strikes highlight how badly Ukraine needs Western air defence systems.
This comes at a time when Western help is starting to plateau with NATO militaries now looking to their own depleted stocks.
Again complex weapons systems take time to build.
For it to be effective air defence needs to be multilayered.
Highspeed longrange weapons are needed to counter incoming ballistic missiles with minimum speeds of 2000 to 3000km-h (1240mph to 1865mph) with many models flying much faster in the true hypersonic range of Mach 5 or higher.
These systems need sophisticated radars that can track multiple fastmoving objects identifying them and predicting their path so air defence missiles can be fired in the right place at the right time to intercept and destroy.
These advanced weapons have now started to arrive:
The first NASAMS or National Advanced SurfacetoAir Missile Systems arrived in Ukraine in September.
A Norwegian-US collaboration NASAMS has distributed radars that can spot and track a variety of targets over a very wide area extremely suitable for protecting the vast Ukrainian landscape.
NASAMS can also incorporate very different air defence systems into its architecture meaning Ukraine can add weapons systems to it integrating them into one effective air defence umbrella that is capable of growing in effectiveness as it increases in size.
Germany has rushed four of its shorttomediumranged IRIST Air defence missile systems to Ukraine.
The IRIST is so new that it has never been tested in combat
There is one proWestern country however which already possesses an effective multilayered advanced air defence system.
Ukraine which has strong cultural ties with Israel was surprised when it was recently rebuffed for purchases of the shortrange Iron Dome and mediumrange Barak 8 air defence weapons.
Israel is pushing to export both weapons to several countries interested in buying but it has refused to sell to Ukraine because such a move could trigger a Russian military response.
Russia controls much of Syrian airspace and Israeli jets regularly pound targets in and around Damascus and parts of southern Syria.
Iranian military convoys allegedly carrying missiles and drones have been repeatedly attacked by Israeli fighter jets.
In late October a suspected Iranian dronemaking factory was destroyed near the capital Damascus in a rare daytime air strike by Israeli aircraft.
While Ukrainians may be certain in their minds of eventual victory that initial optimism has been tempered by the realisation that the war is likely to be more drawn out than people had realised.
Summary Hiked preparedness seen lasting a year could be longer
Norway is now Europes largest gas supplier
Shares a border with Russia in the Arctic
Norway will also seek to bring its new fleet of U.S.made P8 Poseidon submarinehunting maritime patrol aircraft into regular operation at a faster pace than originally planned the chief of defence General Eirik Kristoffersen said.
The scale of alert on which the military operates is classified however and the government declined to give details of the level.
We have seen an escalation (in the war) in Ukraine we (Norway) are training Ukrainian forces the Ukraine war has changed with the Russian mobilisation he said an interview.
And at the same time we have had a gas explosion in the Baltic Sea and drone activity at North Sea platforms.
The raised level is expected to last a year possibly more Kristoffersen added.
Norway first deployed its military to guard offshore platforms and onshore facilities after leaks on the Nord Stream pipelines on Sept
26 in Swedish and Danish waters and has received support from British Dutch French and German armed forces.
The countrys security police last week arrested a suspected Russian spy and is also involved in protecting gas exports vital to Europes energy supplies this coming winter.
NATO member Norway shares a nearly 200 km (125 mile) land border with Russia in the Arctic as well as a vast maritime border.
The Nordic nation of 5.4 million people is also now the biggest exporter of natural gas to the European Union accounting for around a quarter of all EU imports after a drop in Russian flows.
The continuation of the war in Ukraine Russias attempts at weakening (international) support for Ukraine mean that all countries in Europe must consider that they are exposed to hybrid threats
The armed forces will spend less time training and more time on operational duties
The Home Guard a rapid mobilisation force will play a more active role.
The air force had called off training in the United States with its F35 fighter jets preferring to keep them in Norway said Kristoffersen.
Reporting by Gwladys Fouche; Writing by Terje Solsvik; Editing by John Stonestreet Alison Williams and Alex Richardson
Many of the newly mobilised soldiers Moscow has sent to the Ukraine frontline in recent weeks are armed with barely usable weapons according to British defence analysts.
The Kremlin declared a partial mobilisation of up to 300000 reservists in September but the Ministry of Defence believes they could be using weapons that date back to the 1950s.
Russias newly deployed reservists are thought in many cases to be poorly equipped as Moscow struggles with strained logistics systems.
Open source images suggest that the troops have been issued with rifles of a type which could be over 60 years old.
The intelligence update posted by the MoD on Twitter said: In September Russian officers were concerned that some recently mobilised reservists were arriving in Ukraine without weapons.
Open source images suggest that those rifles which have been issued to mobilised reservists are typically AKMs a weapon first introduced in 1959
Many are likely in barely usable condition following poor storage.
AKM fires 7.62mm ammunition while Russias regular combat units are mostly armed with 5.45mm AK74M or AK12 rifles.
The integration of reservists with contract soldiers and combat veterans in Ukraine will mean Russian logisticians will have to push two types of small arms ammunition to frontline positions rather than one.
This will likely further complicate Russias already strained logistics systems.
The AKM is an assault rifle designed by Soviet firearms designer Mikhail Kalashnikov as a replacement for the more famous AK47
Experts say it is the most widely used of the Kalashnikov rifles.
It remains in use around the world but was officially replaced in Soviet frontline service by the AK74 in the late 1970s.
It comes amid renewed Russian air assaults on Ukrainian infrastructure.
Ukraine war live: 80% of Kyiv without water as Russia hits key infrastructure  and emergency blackouts begin
Smoke was seen rising from the Dnipro hydroelectric power plant after Russia struck critical infrastructure
Over 50 missiles struck Ukraine overnight which is a marked increase in comparison the attacks over the past eight months.
Sean Bell a retired airvice marshal told Sky News Vladimir Putin was striking nonmilitary targets in a bid to demoralise and terrorise the Ukrainian population.
The irony is for most of the Ukrainians this will have quite the opposite effect it will galvanise their support and harden their resolve he said.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said he hopes US President Joe Biden has the wisdom to deal with a global confrontation similar to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis referencing the war on Ukraine.
In October 1962 a Soviet submarine captain wanted to launch a nuclear weapon after the US Navy dropped depth charges around the submarine
Later that day Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all US missiles from Turkey in exchange for Khrushchev removing the same from Cuba.
The crisis was defused though it became a symbol of the perils of superpower rivalry in the Cold War.
Lavrov said the Russian leadership including President Vladimir Putin is still prepared for discussions on Ukraine.
The US and its European allies say Russian concerns are overblown and cannot justify the invasion of a former Soviet neighbour whose borders Moscow recognised after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union.
Why did this happen?
For the second time in my life the threat of nuclear war is keeping me up at night
Now almost 40 years later that fear has returned as Russian President Vladimir Putin issues threats of nuclear use seemingly to compensate for the poor performance of his armed forces fighting in Ukraine
While Russia and the United States issue competing threats it is important to understand the different pathways to nuclear escalation that could emerge from the war in Ukraine
Of course any conventional conflict involving a nucleararmed power has the potential to escalate
In this case Putin believes that Russia is in a highstakes conflict
He envisioned a quick and decisive victory; instead Ukrainian forces have shown a greater will to fight and have Russian forces on the run even retreating from newly annexed territories
Under these circumstances nuclear weapons could be the ace in the hole an instrument for reversing defeats on the battlefield
and its NATO allies are no strangers to this type of strategy
During the Cold War the Western alliance followed the strategy of flexible response threatening to use nuclear weapons to defeat what many considered the conventionally superior armed forces of the Warsaw Pact
The alliance would respond to an invasion first with lowyield battlefield nuclear weapons reserving the ability to escalate to greater nuclear use if Warsaw Pact members did not withdraw
NATO took numerous steps to convince Soviet leaders that this threat was credible
policymakers should assume Russia today might make the same calculation about its war in Ukraine
Even NATO seems to understand Russia cares deeply about what happens in Ukraine.
What then are the paths to nuclear use in the Ukraine war? One road to escalation could involve the deliberate use of nuclear weapons by Russia
For example the collapse of Russian armed forces in Ukraine especially the portions of the country recently annexed could prompt Putin to conduct a handful of attacks with lowyield nuclear weapons to compel his opponents to back down
This is foolish and dangerous
This possibility likely deterred the Biden administration from creating a nofly zone over Ukraine
Despite calls from former national security officials U.S
officials seemed to understand the nuclear risks.
Even if Putin were to resist deliberate nuclear use in response to direct NATO military intervention there would be the danger of inadvertent escalation
How NATO fights conventionally could look like efforts to disarm Russia of its nuclear weapons
Similarly there would be the possibility of accidental escalation
Both sides would face tremendous stress to keep control of their nuclear forces while fighting an intense conventional war.
NATO military intervention then would likely provoke more nuclear escalation
With these escalation dynamics in mind the U.S
and its allies need to start thinking about ending the conventional war in Ukraine rather than prolonging it
Like it or not Putin sees this as a highstakes conflict
Although it is in U.S
Now is the time for the U.S
to start thinking about creating offramps to terminate the war and balance these interests
It would not be the first time American policymakers pressured partners against taking actions that might cause a war to escalate
Sometimes we need to choose between the lesser of two evils.
Jasen Castillo is codirector of the Albritton Center for Grand Strategy at Texas A&M University and a nonresident fellow at the foreign policy think tank Defense Priorities.
Submit a letter of no more than 400 words to the editor here or email letters@chicagotribune.com.
A man sits as people queue to receive a daily ration of bread in a school in Mykolaiv Tuesday Oct
Mykolaiv residents pick up bread from the only food distribution point in Varvarivka a Mykolaiv district where thousands of people live
One person is allowed to receive free bread just once in three days
A man sits as people queue to receive a daily ration of bread in a school in Mykolaiv Tuesday Oct
Mykolaiv residents pick up bread from the only food distribution point in Varvarivka a Mykolaiv district where thousands of people live
One person is allowed to receive free bread just once in three days
Other reports have suggested that Russian troops are increasingly forced to use old and sometimes unreliable equipment and that some of the newly mobilized troops are rushed to the war front with little training
Last week Putin tried to show all is well by visiting a training site in Russia where he was shown well equipped soldiers.
The World Bank estimates the damage to Ukraine so far at 350 billion euros ($345 billion).
Electricity shortfalls are so severe that Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Irina Vereshchuk on Tuesday asked citizens living abroad not to return this winter to avoid placing further strain on the power supply.
He promised that Germany would help rebuild destroyed towns immediately and send two more MARS Medium Artillery Missile Systems and four type 2000 selfpropelled howitzers.
On the battlefront Russian missiles set a gas station on fire late Tuesday in the southcentral city of Dnipro killing a pregnant woman in her car and the operator of a car wash at the facility while wounding at least three Ukrainian news agencies reported.
In the southern city of Mykolaiv residents lined up for water and essential supplies Tuesday as Ukrainian forces advanced on the nearby Russianoccupied city of Kherson.
Kyiv wants to step up the fight but says it needs more war materiel.
The 38 yearold fled Ukraine with her two children in March weeks after the Russian invasion began.
They spent three months in an overcrowded refugee centre in neighbouring Moldova until Switzerland granted them asylum.
The children 12 yearold Olena and sevenyearold Mykola recently started school
They are surrounded by caring teachers and classmates who help them adapt to a Germanlanguage education.
Back in the Ukrainian capital she had helped her husband Oleh run a stationery shop.
Oleh still works in the shop but will join his family as soon as Ukraine starts letting men aged between 18 and 60 out of the country.
Unlike millions of other Ukrainians uprooted by the war the Tarasevyches have not lost their comfortable threebedroom apartment or jobs
Thankfully none of their relatives or friends have been killed in the conflict.
But they are committed to a new life in Switzerland.
His shop was not particularly profitable before the war and switching to another business was risky he said.
The current official figure is 43 million but the statistics are widely understood to be far from true.
Before the war at least 8 million Ukrainians worked in Europe full or parttime thanks to the visafree policy
It had also been relatively easy to obtain a work visa.
Many worked as seasonal farmhands drivers construction workers or cashiers and came home only for Easter or Christmas.
With each paycheque they would set aside enough money for a new house or apartment in their hometown or village.
And some young Ukrainians familiar with life in the European Union are now determined to build careers in the bloc.
These days Aleksander studies civil engineering at Hamburg University
He has a Montenegrin girlfriend and a parttime job at a bowling alley.
He calls his parents at least once a day.
The war in Ukraine has fuelled the largest European refugee crisis since World War II.
According to the United Nations 7.7 million refugees from Ukraine have been registered across Europe since the war began with most arriving in Poland.
By comparison the global average rate was 2.2 and 1.4 in Canada 1.51 in Russia 1.56 in the United Kingdom and 2.21 in Peru.
Ukraine needs a repatriation programme but this is unfeasible without a booming economy he said.
However another observer said the shortage of workingage people could prove economically beneficial.
No home to return to
These days Mariupol is under Russian occupation and Kolesnikov does not know for how long.
His family have settled in a tiny Polish village outside Krakow.
He is ready to join them as soon as the borders open because restarting life from scratch in Kyiv is not an option.
Lawyers in the capital are very territorial and finding a good job without connections is nearly impossible he said.
Dozens of bullets scarred the gray front wall and most of the upper windows were shattered
By August only a few families remained
Some noticed dozens of bats trapped in the lower windows
The animals had flown through broken panes of glass then got stuck unable to find an exit
Soon they were dying of dehydration and starvation.
But in a lucky turn of events one of the families called the Ukrainian Bat Rehabilitation Center an organization of biologists and veterinarians who rescue and treat injured bats
When Anton Vlaschenko its director and Lika But a volunteer arrived on the scene they carefully removed the remaining animals the majority of which were common noctules or Nyctalus noctula
Eight of the bats were already dead
The remaining 18 they put inside a bag and took home
His organization established in 2013 has become the largest bat rescue and research facility in Eastern Europe
But the war changed everything
The center lost all its funding in February and some of its staff and collaborators were drafted
This summer Russian bombing damaged many multifamily structures in the Saltivka district of Kharkiv including this highrise apartment building
Visual: Serhii Mykhalchuk-Global Images Ukraine via Getty Images
Making matters worse the Russian Ministry of Defense accused the center and collaborating researchers from the Institute of Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine in Kharkiv of developing bioweapons
On March 11 at a meeting of the U.N
During the war the center has received calls about bats trapped in shelled buildings and bunkers
Those they rescue are taken home and cared for by staff members like Anton Vlaschenko pictured here
Almost all the research and international collaboration abruptly stopped on Feb
24 when Russia invaded Ukraine
A private Ukrainian foundation that sponsored the project was no longer able to provide support leaving the center to rely on financing from abroad
Crucial support also came from neighboring Poland
Lika But volunteer at the Ukrainian Bat Rehabilitation Center releases common noctules while sirens blare in the city of Kharkiv Ukraine in March 2022.
Visual: Ukrainian Bat Rehabilitation Center
In April Kharkiv remained partially encircled by Russian troops
In August when missiles hit two Kharkiv dormitories another 25 people were killed and several dozen injured.
From 2010 to 2011 he was a fellow in the Knight Science Journalism Program at MIT.
The war in Ukraine is now the largest conventional (interstate) conflict since the Korean War across a range of measures: battlefield deaths personnel committed ordnance used
It is also the first proxy war between nucleararmed powers since the Russian intervention into Syria
It is therefore not unreasonable to ask what the effects of the Ukraine conflict are beyond that country and Europe
The Korean War played a significant role in hardening the Cold War standoff not only through prompting the creation of US alliances in Asia but in deepening commitments to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact in Europe.
In each country in Asia analysts and policymakers are watching the Ukraine war closely and consciously and unconsciously deriving lessons from it: what do events in Ukraine imply for other countries in terms of what is possible what is risky and what competitors may be emboldened to try? Perceptions of the conflict are coalescing around four fundamental questions: why did the war break out?; how is the war being fought?; what does the war mean for global order?; and when and under what conditions will it come to an end? In the debates that attend each of these questions we can start to see some of the broader implications of the Ukraine war for Asia.
Why did the war break out?
The obvious answer to this question is that Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February 2022; what is more contested is why Russia invaded Ukraine
A rubicon has been crossed in the significance of information warfare which will have major implications for deepening confrontations in Asia.
The second answer is that Western actions after the Cold War enabled emboldened and provoked the Russian invasion
By brushing aside considerations of international legitimacy these operations justified the use of force by great powers for their own conceptions of the requirements of order
The strategic lesson of this interpretation is that order in Asia cannot be entrusted to law and institutions; the best prospect for peace is a concert of nucleararmed great powers holding the ring.
Three contending debates swirl around why Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine (Kremlin.ru)
The strategic implications of this argument are that the battle lines are now between democracies and autocracies: as the latter tighten their mutual commitments in Asia so must the former cleave closer together.
How is the war being fought?
There seem to be three aspects of the conduct of the Ukraine war that have implications for strategic dynamics in Asia
The first is that in this apparently asymmetric contest the smaller party is winning
A great deal of analysis has been devoted to why Russia has failed to prevail and why Ukraine has not only blunted the invasion but is reversing Russian gains
Many accounts converge around imbalances in preparation morale and regime type; some on the nature of the terrain; and most on the effectiveness of the military equipment and intelligence supplied to Ukraine by Western countries.
Increasingly sophisticated longrange precision strike weapons the use of electromagnetic pulse to disable air defences and developments in combined arms operations since the 1991 Gulf War had started to tip perceptions of the offencedefence balance decisively in favour of the attacking side in the minds of analysts and policymakers
It is likely this has been slowed if not reversed by the Ukraine war.
The strategic implications for Asia are promising since perceptions of the potency of offence are generally destabilising because states are anxious about competitors gaining the upper hand by attacking first
A new appreciation of the power of defence on the other hand has likely made Chinese military planners more cautious about the likelihood of success in an invasion of Taiwan.
Chinese military planners may be more cautious about the likelihood of success in an invasion of Taiwan (Annabelle Chih-Getty Images)
The second aspect of the conduct of the war is the potency of the information war
Wary of Russian information operations from the 2008 invasion of Georgia to the 2016 US Presidential election Western states have devoted a great deal of time and effort to collecting and publicly presenting intelligence that refutes Russian information operations
As a result the solidarity within the West and with Ukraine has delivered ongoing materiel and moral support to Ukraine while making it difficult for those inclined to back Russia or to abstain from commenting to justify their positions
A rubicon has been crossed in the significance of information warfare which will have major implications for deepening confrontations in Asia.
What remains unclear is the ultimate objective for the West
Third the Ukraine war has provided the United States and its allies with the best opportunity to delegitimise and weaken an authoritarian challenger since the Soviet Union withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989
The Soviet Union did this in Vietnam in the 1960s; the United States in Afghanistan in the 1980s
What remains unclear is the ultimate objective for the West
What does the war mean for global order?
Denunciations and adverse resolutions carry little weight while the rising stakes in the information war allow incompatible claims to jostle along with little to adjudicate between them.
The sense of a common global order bounded by basic common interests and perceptions is receding with little indication of when the decay will stop
When great powers cannot even agree on shared interests the grounds for mutual restraint and avoidance of catastrophe will continue to shrink.
Another dangerous domino to fall is the status of nuclear nonproliferation norms
By invading Ukraine in 2014 and 2022 Russia broke the terms of the 1994 Budapest memorandum under which Ukraine Belarus and Kazakhstan agreed to return Soviet nuclear warheads on their soil to Russia in exchange for an undertaking that they would not be attacked in future by Russia
As Russian armour rolled towards Kyiv in February those pondering the folly of that deal would not only have been Ukrainian
Many strategists would have thought back to the attacks on Iraq and Libya and the restraint shown to Pakistan North Korea and Iran to see the distinction between those who surrender their nuclear capabilities and those who press ahead in terms of maintaining their security and sovereignty.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy inspecting the damage in Bucha in May following Russian occupation of the area (President of Ukraine-Flickr)
Options for acquiring nuclear weapons must be playing on the minds of policymakers and analysts particularly in Asia.
And as the lines of confrontation between the West and authoritarian nations come into sharper relief over Ukraine it becomes harder to choose one side without alienating the other
Rising tech decoupling reinforces the logic of choice over the logic of options
This is uncomfortable territory for India Indonesia and many other countries in Asia that prefer multialignment as a grand strategy for managing turbulence in their international relations.
When and under what conditions will the war end?
There are broadly three endgames to this war each with its particular strategic implications for Asia.
The one least likely is that Russia prevails
Somehow Moscow summons the will and materiel to push Ukrainian forces back while blunting the effects of Western military supplies and intelligence
Russia regains the regions of Ukraine that allegedly have voted to align with Moscow and offers Kyiv a peace deal
Just as the world lived for decades with the strategic implications of the Korean War so we in Asia will be living with the fallout of the Ukraine War for decades to come.
More likely is that Ukraine wins
Its operations force Russian troops out of eastern and southern Ukraine but stop short of trying to retake Crimea
Russia sues for peace on the condition that Western sanctions are lifted and Kyiv recognises the loss of Crimea
Ukraine joins NATO and the European Union
Russia having had its reputation and legitimacy shredded becomes ever more reliant on China
This is a boon to Beijing virtually guaranteeing that exercises of Russian resolve such as putting down unrest in Kazakhstan earlier this year will not be repeated
With a weak and compliant neighbour along its inner Asian frontier China can devote more attention to the Pacific and Indian Oceans
But President Xi Jinping will be cautious
Another possibility is neither side wins
The war drags on through 2023 and perhaps beyond to an exhausted stalemate
Support for the war wanes in both Ukraine and Russia as the stunning advances and retreats of 2022 grind towards a bitter war of attrition
Both sides are aggrieved and bedevilled by terrorist attacks
Ukraine remains in limbo wanting NATO membership but with Brussels cautious about buying into the fight on these conditions
The implications of this outcome for Asia could be profound
Wars through history have been like lightning flashes over a darkened playing field suddenly illuminating the dispositions and vulnerabilities of those on the pitch
The Ukraine war has been no different
The intensity and balance of the conflict have revealed the pretensions and possibilities of weapons developed during the information age in ways that other shortrun campaigns did not
This cannot but shape the perceptions of analysts and policymakers in Asia profoundly
Just as the world lived for decades with the strategic implications of the Korean War so we in Asia will be living with the fallout of the Ukraine War for decades to come.
The bursts of Ukrainian fire flying over his head at the Russians in their southern stronghold of Kherson down the road gave Oleksandr Prikhodko reason to hope.
The energetic 42 yearold was standing in the sootcovered ruins of the family store he had built on the edge of land Russia suddenly claims as its own.
The Russians smashed his lifes work to smithereens during their second attempt to seize the nearby Ukrainian riverside port of Mykolaiv in July.
Read more: Liz Truss was scared Vladimir Putin may fire nukes in last days as UK PM: Report
The Ukrainians have since launched a stirring counterassault that has turned the road between Mykolaiv and Kherson into one of the central axes of the war.
Prikhodko grew up along that road in the onefactory village of Kotlyareve.
The Russians blew up the factory as well.
When you hear news about our successes there is huge psychological relief Prikhodko said between sharp bangs of outgoing rocket fire.
Even tiny things such as seeing a military car drive out to the front and then safely come back makes you feel better he said.
Our lives depend on our soldiers
And they have to somehow understand that we know that.
A general view of the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant on September 11
The annexation of Zaporizhzhia and three other regions is illegal under international law and has been widely condemned by the international community.
On Tuesday the IAEA said that Murashov will not continue his duties at the nuclear power plant following his release from Russian detention.
Kotin also noted that operational issues at the plant would be resolved by the technical staff by agreement with the central office of the company.
Grossi will also visit Russia in the coming days.
He also said that the IAEA considers the facility Ukrainian.
The war should stop immediately
Intense Russian shelling near the facility this summer sparked concerns of a nuclear accident prompting the International Atomic Energy Agency to send a team there.
The nuclear plant with six reactors is the largest in Europe
It continues to be run by Ukrainian technicians but the forcible annexation of Zaporizhzhia means that according to Russian law it is now on Russian territory.
He says the hasty withdrawal of Russian troops from northeastern Ukraine is by no means signaling the last stretch of the war
Ukraine war update: Q&A with Hein Goemans
Is that possibly signaling the end of the war?
While unexpected this Ukrainian battle victory is not the beginning of the end of the war.
Individual victories or defeats in a specific battle are often mistakenly read as indicating a change in the likelihood of war termination
Instead what matters most is whether and how expectations on both sides change
And in this case clearly Russian expectations of a swift victory have changed
The proof is in the conscription of 300000 more Russian men some reportedly without any military training or experience
Russia I think has become more pessimistic about getting its original war aims fulfilled
You need the opponents to change their mind
On the other hand Ukraine has perhaps become more optimistic
If that is true the key point to realize is that the gap between the minimal demands may not have decreased at all
How do expectations affect war strategy and the likelihood of peace?
A change in expectations is often more important than a single battle or campaign victory.
Goemans: Most people think that if you win a battle or a campaign peace becomes more likely because the other side is defeated and they recognize that they are defeated which makes them more willing to make a deal
A change in expectations is often more important than a single battle or campaign victory
Only if something unexpected happened would I change my expectations and my strategy
You could sustain a military defeat and still get a better deal.
A good example is the Yom Kippur War of 1974
The attacking Egyptian army was drastically defeated by the Israelis
Yet the Egyptians got the Sinai back
They showed themselves a lot more competent than the Israelis had thought after 1967
So you have this weird case where militarily Egypt lost and still the Egyptians got a better deal in the end which was clearly not a military outcome
What happened was a change in expectations.
Neither is likely to speed up a ceasefire.
I still expect the war to last at least another year maybe two
Both sides still have plans and ideas to test before their expectations are likely to converge
My hands are forced
But not like this
That sends a clear message.
How does that work?
Essentially one side must get the other to change their mind and to convince them that striking a deal now is better than to continue fighting
We know that some leaders continue fighting for their own survival against the very interests of their country and their own people
We saw that in Germany in the First and Second World War and also in Japan during World War II
We political scientists hold that opponents fight in order to find that something that makes peace possible
But what really is that? One side must get the other to change its mind
You must get them to agree that making a deal now is better than to continue fighting
It reminds me of the case of Germany in the First World War where just four months into the war Kaiser Wilhelm II and his cabinet concluded that it was unwinnable
Yet they fought on for another four years
Why? Because they knew that if they lost they would be overthrown by a revolution
Of course they were right
Leaders in such unwinnable situations are very dangerous
They are the reason that World War I dragged on much longer than it should have
Putin also has a domestic problem
Originally he delayed mass mobilization to avoid domestic unrest against the advice of the political hawks in the Kremlin who want a largerscale war
Over the past week more than 200000 Russians have fled their country to avoid conscription
It scares the [expletive] out of me because these people talk about nukes and about attacking Poland and Latvia Lithuania and about nuking Paris and London
Do the hawks in the Kremlin think Russia can survive an escalation that includes nuclear strikes?
that they told Putin and the Kremlin nukes would be unacceptable
Goemans: The hawks in the Kremlin think the war has been fought wrongly or poorly
And in a sense they are right
The Russian army is just a very weak poor army
My friend Branislav Slantchev [a Rochester PhD and now a professor of political science at the University of California San Diego] has written about this in a recent terrifying blog post
In that scenario he said he expects the Russians to use a nuclear weapon under 1 kiloton which he says one could fire with artillery or any of the multiple dualuse rockets and missiles the Russians have in their arsenal
Of course the United States and the rest of the world would go absolutely bananas
The thing that really struck me a few days ago is that people in Washington have said very clearly and in very unmistakable terms that they told Putin and the Kremlin nukes would be unacceptable
So that tells me they are afraid that Russia might actually do it
The consequences depend on whether Russia wins or loses and on whether Ukraine survives or is dismembered.
As a result the whole security infrastructure in Europe would crumble with direct repercussions for NATO European Union cohesion Germany and the Middle East
All these policies that have led to peaceful cooperation will all be thrown out creating instability in Europe and affect the United States deeply
A large part of the stability that we saw during the Cold War era was based on the expectation that the situation would be stable
It was stable because we expected it to be stable
In the bestcase scenario Ukraine wins a better deal than before the war
For me that means more defensible borders which would mean some form of continued Western presence and the arming of Ukraine by the West along with training and funding
All that would create a much more stable Europe
I hope that the extremists in Russia would have learned a lesson and everybody in Europe would be on their guard with respect to Russia for another generation or two.
How is the war in Ukraine affecting Russia the Russian people?
On top of the sanctions the brain drain is tremendous as is the exodus of young and middleaged educated males who have the means and who are worried about being conscripted
Add to that the mounting numbers of dead soldiers: Russia is going to have an acute shortage of men which will create all kinds of economic and societal problems.
Maybe a return to the status quo before February 24 and internationally overseen plebiscites in Luhansk Donetsk and Crimea
Goemans: Their army is poor their equipment is rotten and the sanctions make it impossible to build new equipment to update their machinery
Read more insights about the war in Ukraine
Ukraine war updates: Russia retreats from a key city it just claimed to annex
As the week begins heres a look ahead and a roundup of key developments from the past week.
What to watch this week
Russias parliament will ratify its attempted annexation of four Ukrainian territories widely condemned internationally as illegal
On Monday the lower house unanimously approved it
The upper house is expected to pass it on Tuesday.
Following Ukraines recapture of Lyman in the east Ukrainian forces appeared to break through Russian lines in the south on Monday.
Russian President Vladimir Putin turns 70 Friday.
What happened last week
26: The first troops called up in Russias new mobilization in Ukraine arrived at military bases many with no prior training and with few trainers on hand according to British defense intelligence
Putin later said mistakes in the callup should be corrected.
27: Russia claimed that staged referendums in four occupied regions of Ukraine showed the people chose to join the Russian Federation
United Nations leaders and many countries called the process a sham and a violation of international law.
28: Moscowbacked officials in occupied parts of Ukraine made appeals for the regions to join the Russian Federation
Putins approval rating fell 6 points to 77% in a poll by the Levada Center
Defense Department meanwhile announced $1.1 billion in additional security aid to Ukraine.
29: Star Wars actor Mark Hamill threw his support behind a fundraiser to buy drones for Ukraine in the war with the evil empire he said.
30: Putin signed documents claiming Russia is annexing four regions from Ukraine but world powers refuse to recognize it
Ukraine applied for accelerated NATO membership.
1: Russian forces retreated as Ukraine recaptured the city of Lyman located in one of the eastern regions the Kremlin claimed to annex.
2: Leaders of nine European countries made a joint statement in support of Ukraine joining NATO
And Pope Francis made a strong plea for Putin to end the war.
Jewish Ukrainian father and son soldiers mark holy days under cloud of Russias war.
With Ukraine at war officials hope to bring tourism back to areas away from fighting.
Putin plans to formally annex 4 regions from Ukraine Friday.
Ukraines offensive in Kharkiv was hard and bitter say soldiers who did the fighting.
War didnt stop Hasidic pilgrims from gathering in Ukraine for the Jewish new year.
With staged referendums in Ukraine complete Russia begins the annexation process.
Occupied regions of Ukraine vote to join Russia in staged referendums.
Russian men flee the country
Many are showing up in Istanbul.
Seismologists suspect explosions damaged undersea pipelines that carry Russian gas.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
Sundays main news in the Ukraine war concerned the blockage of grain exports in the Black Sea following Russias withdrawal from a UNbrokered deal
Tens of thousands of Czechs show their support for Ukraine
Tens of thousands of Czechs gathered in the capital on Sunday to demonstrate their solidarity with Ukraine and their support for democratic values.
The rally took place in reaction to three recent antigovernment demonstrations where other protesters demanded the resignation of the proWestern coalition government of conservative Prime Minister Petr Fiala for its support for Ukraine.
Their organisers are known for spreading Russian propaganda and opposing COVID19 vaccinations.
The group also previously held massive rallies against the former prime minister populist billionaire Andrej Babis calling him a threat to democracy.
A woman wipes her eyes as tens of thousands of people gathers for an antiwar protest in Prague Czech Republic Sunday Oct
More Ukrainian civilians killed as Russian missile attacks continue
On the battlefront Russian missile attacks kept pounding key frontline hot spots in Ukraine
In the eastern Donetsk region where the fighting is ongoing near the cities of Bakhmut and Avdiivka eight cities and villages were shelled.
In addition in areas that Ukraine has recaptured residents are still recovering bodies of killed civilians Donetsk Governor Pavlo Kyrylenko said.
Power outages were reported Sunday in the occupied Ukrainian city of Enerhodar home to the closed Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant Europes largest
Ukrainian and Russian officials traded blame for the shelling that caused the blackout.
Russian soldiers released in prisoner swap
Russian state TV shared footage on Sunday of what it said were Russian soldiers who had been released as part of a prisoner swap the day before.
The video showed young men disembarking from a plane and boarding buses including one man being met by his father.
Some were filmed apparently talking to loved ones on their phones telling them they were home.
The AP could not independently verify the date location or conditions under which the footage was shot.
The Russian defence ministry said in a statement on Saturday that Kyiv released 50 Russian army personnel as part of a prisoner swap that same day.
Fifty Ukrainian soldiers and two civilians were released as part of the swap with Russia both sides reported.
Russias Lavrov needles Biden over Cuban Missile Crisis and Ukraine
President Vladimir Putins foreign minister on Sunday needled Joe Biden over Ukraine saying that he hoped the US President had the wisdom to deal with a global confrontation similar to the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis.
In an interview for a Russian state television documentary on the missile crisis Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said there were similarities to 1962 largely because Russia was now threatened by Western weapons in Ukraine.
I hope that in todays situation President Joe Biden will have more opportunities to understand who gives orders and how Lavrov said with a faint smile
This situation is very disturbing.
Russias invasion of Ukraine has triggered the biggest confrontation between Moscow and the West since the Cuban crisis when the Soviet Union and the US are to considered to have come closest to nuclear war.
UK politicians demand probe into Liz Truss phone hack claim
The Mail on Sunday said the hack was discovered when Truss was running to become Conservative Party leader and prime minister in the summer
It said the security breach was kept secret by thenPrime Minister Boris Johnson and the head of the civil service.
The newspaper citing unnamed sources said Russian spies were suspected of the hack
It said the hackers gained access to sensitive information including discussions about the Ukraine war with foreign officials as well as private conversations between Truss and a political ally former Treasury chief Kwasi Kwarteng.
Opposition parties demanded an independent investigation into the hack and into the leak of the information to a newspaper.
Russian forces do not fully control any of the four areas and it remains unclear where Russia is attempting to set its new external border.
Ukrainian forces captured the town of Dudchany on the west bank of the Dnipro River in their major advance in Kherson region and in the east Ukrainian forces were advancing after capturing Lyman the main Russian bastion in the north of Donetsk province.
The decree formalised comments made by Zelenskiy on Friday after the Russian president proclaimed the four occupied regions of Ukraine were to become part of Russia.
ProRussian leaders in the occupied regions have claimed that the situation is stabilising this morning
The Russian preisdent said the decree would defer conscription for additional categories of students including those enrolled at accredited private universities and certain postgraduate students.
The latest round of sanctions the eighth since February were signed off by EU ambassadors on Wednesday a week since the measures were proposed a time scale regarded as lightning speed in Brussels.
Rafael Grossi head of the International Atomic Energy Agency is expected to visit Moscow in the coming days to discuss the situation at the plant which has been occupied by Russian forces since the earliest days of the war
Energoatom the Ukrainian stateenterprise that owns the plant has said it may restart it to ensure safety.
All basics of life have been destroyed here
They are doing so everywhere in the territories they seize
This is a fight for freedom and democracy around the world
We should not give in to those who want a deal which trades away Ukrainian land
They are proposing to pay in Ukrainian lives for the illusion of peace
We will stand with our Ukrainian friends however long it takes
Ukraine must win
There were two documented cases of Ukrainian servicemen having been tortured to death he said.
About 2000 videos photographs and audio files of alleged war crimes have been submitted to the UN mandated international commission of inquiry (UN COI) on Ukraine
The footage was captured through an app designed to create verifiable evidence.
Two women in Russiaannexed Crimea including Miss Crimea have been found guilty of discrediting the Russian army by singing a patriotic Ukrainian song.
In works such as the 1925 novel White Guard Ukrainians are violent savages whose language irritates the ears of educated people
The museum along with an adjacent sculpture showing the author seated on a bench is a major landmark in central Kyiv
I pass it regularly while on assignment
In a statement the group argued that the writer who died in 1940 no longer deserved the honor and that the exhibits should be passed to the National Museum of Literature
Ukrainian culture the authorities believe is rich enough to withstand a dismissive longdead literary figure
The current invasion which began in February has turned many of us into fierce advocates of our own language literature and music.
Read: The Ukrainians are defending the values Americans claim to hold
Russian President Vladimir Putin recently accused us of becoming an antiRussian enclave
I now believe that he is right
What he fails to mention is that he is the one who made us antiRussian.
Just as Bulgakov did in the 20th century many Russian commentators cast aspersions on Ukrainian independence and scoff at the Ukrainian language
Unlike in the west of Ukraine almost nobody around me spoke Ukrainian
My Russianspeaking parents had grown up in Soviet Ukraine
My grandparents viewed the fall of the U.S.S.R
as a major tragedy
At home my mother and father would discuss the flourishing culture of Moscow and St
They knew most of the major Russian composers yet never took the time to look for Ukrainian ones
They thought that Ukrainian literature would never be able to compete with worldfamous work of writers such as Dostoyevsky or Bulgakov
They were never taught in school about how the Soviet authorities executed members of the Ukrainian resistance during and after World War II and they viewed residents of rural Ukraine as forever whining about past miseries.
At school my underpaid and unenthusiastic teachers murmured about the heroic periods of Ukrainian history and begged us to read tragic masterpieces of Ukrainian literature
But as soon as I left the classroom I dove into a Russian world
Before 2013 if you wanted to have a good job in journalism you had to know speak and write in Russian which created opportunities to address a relatively wide audience
Speaking Ukrainian as your primary language meant significant career limits.
In my childhood and early adult years Ukraine was awash in movies that consistently portrayed my country and its citizens in negative ways
In the crime drama Brat 2 the hero is a Russian chauvinist
Ukrainians are portrayed as gangsters
In Kandagar a war drama about Russian pilots smuggling arms to Afghanistan a Ukrainian team member is a coward
They were the ones who prevailed in World War II and saved all of Europe
Ukrainians were funny younger brothers with a silly language and a primitive culture.
In that era commentators who urged the Ukrainian public to embrace our genius writers and historical figures fighting for independence from Russia throughout our common history were portrayed as nationalists or even Nazi collaborators.
But I ignored my nationality because I thought it was irrelevant in the modern world.
Many Ukrainians craved closer ties to the West
But our president back then Viktor Yanukovych was proMoscow to the point of refusing to sign an association agreement with the European Union that our Parliament had approved; instead he favored closer integration with Russia
His regime beat illegally jailed and even killed people protesting his usurpation of power
Street protests forced Yanukovych out
Witnessing all of this I felt as if I had been struck by lightning.
Anne Applebaum: The other Ukrainian army
In this period I started reading Ukrainian authors and paying more attention to Ukrainian artists
From the historian Yaroslav Hrytsak I learned that Russia has always treated Ukraine not as an equal or even as a little brother but as a colony
In the novels and plays of Serhiy Zhadan I read about how proRussian forces had corrupted eastern Ukraine
The electronic folk band Onuka brought traditional Ukrainian instruments back into our popular culture
A decade ago voices challenging Russian narratives were still hard to find in the Ukrainian media but that is no longer true
Under a 2016 law passed by our Parliament a quarter of the songs played on radio stations had to be in Ukrainian; that quota has ratcheted up since then and stations have typically exceeded it.
Still in 2020 six years after the start of the Russian invasion the Russian language still prevailed on Ukrainian television and in the streets of the biggest cities the civilsociety group Prostir Svobody has reported
Like most people I know I wanted to believe that language has nothing to do with politics
By comparison only half of the respondents said they speak Ukrainian exclusively
Most people realize as I do that even if all government business is conducted in Ukrainian the Russian language will still be spoken widely in Ukraine after more than 200 years of domination by Russia.
The officiallanguage law is less popular in the east and the south of Ukraine where residents are more likely to speak Russian and where proRussian television channels have tried to convince viewers that they are under attack
Yet his invasions have made Ukraine more Ukrainian.
Back in 2012 according to the Rating Group 57 percent of respondents said Ukrainian was their native language
After the start of the fullscale invasion in February that number grew to 76
In the past decade the proportion of Ukrainians who claimed to be native Russian speakers fell by half from 42 percent to 19
I decided to switch to Ukrainian as my default language around 2016 after traveling abroad
Hearing me speak to my husband a woman in Montenegro asked me if I was Russian
Who would want to be associated with an invading nation?
Poll data show that Ukrainians have cut back sharply on the number of Russian songs and television shows that they consume
Popular performers have changed their repertoire accordingly
All of this is a natural reaction to what Russia has done to us
We have seen our supposedly superior brothers killing civilians ruining our cities and stealing our washing machines
More and more of my fellow citizens have come to realize that embracing our Ukrainian identity is a matter of survival.
Language and music have proved to be powerful weapons on the home front just as High Mobility Artillery Rocket System equipment has on the war front
The Bulgakov Museum remains open on Andriivsky Descent
The sculpture commemorating the author still stands nearby
Father Yakov is teaching himself Kazakh by reading psalms and other passages from the Bible
But if Father Yakov Voronstov 36 has his way that may change.
Like many mothertongue speakers of Russian in Kazakhstan Father Yakov studied Kazakh at school and university albeit in a largely desultory fashion since he saw little likelihood of using the language in daily life
Everything changed on February 24 the day that Russia began its invasion of Ukraine.
And here it was taking shape
Father Yakov said the war has not quashed his love for the classics of Russian literature but he resolved to renounce anything that smacked of chauvinism and militarism.
These days Father Yakov peppers his Facebook status updates with biblical quotations in Kazakh
He teaches himself the language by reading psalms and other passages from the Bible.
For Kazakh to gain a deeper hold across the country however there will be some uphill climbing to do.
In a 2020 survey of 1600 people conducted by the FriedrichEbertStiftung foundation a German governmentfunded research group 35.1 percent of respondents stated that they spoke Kazakh at home
Fully 30.5 percent said they spoke Russian while 25.8 percent said they used both languages.
The war in Ukraine is triggering a noticeable shift
But looking at this situation I just have to say thank you
Aleksei Skalozubov an ethnic Russian and a native of the largely Russianspeaking Akmola region filmed and uploaded a video appeal after the invasion began.
I am Russian and I am against Russian military aggression
Speaking to Eurasianet Skalozubov said that he felt it was important for him to speak out to make it clear where the loyalties of citizens like him lay.
Taking full advantage of the increased public profile earned through the video appeal and his fundraising activities in support of Ukrainians Skalozubov turned his attention to a longdormant idea to learn Kazakh properly
When he first moved to Almaty he tried taking oneonone classes but the lack of reallife practice was discouraging
Now he is having another go.
Skalozubov said many of the people involved in the club are Russians who fled for Kazakhstan immediately after the outbreak of the war and latterly following the partial mobilization drive announced by President Vladimir Putin in September.
Now almost all of our newcomers are Russians
Askar is originally from Dagestan but moved to Moscow some years ago
He was among the large numbers of Russian citizens to leave his country in reaction to the war
When he spoke to Eurasianet he had attended two sessions at Batyl bol.
Gestures of cultural and linguistic solidarity with the Kazakh people as well as objection to the war in Ukraine have not been without controversy though.
Kataryna a mum with two young children tries to explain her dilemma: Russia she says still has a lot of power which is why it is scary that they might return
Because the city has already suffered very badly and if the city will be passed back and forth from hand to hand then nothing will remain including people.
Public support for sanctions on Russia remains overwhelming but could erode if the costofliving crisis worsens an exclusive poll for Sky News has found.
The poll by Ipsos suggests that 70% of the public support implementing sanctions on Russia for its invasion of Ukraine.
However just 41% of people now say they would still back sanctions if it means a further rise in energy bills.
Thats a significant decrease since March when three out of four people (73%) were willing to stomach an increase in energy prices.
A third of people (32%) now say they would oppose sanctions if they were to lead to a further increase in energy prices up from just 8% of respondents in March.
The poll comes ahead of a special programme on Sky News in conjunction with the Imperial War Museum Institute looking at the war in Ukraine on Tuesday evening at 7.30pm.
Analysis: Support for Ukraine sanctions strong  but for how long? Rob Powell Political correspondent @robpowellnews The link between Russian sanctions and rising prices here is not as obvious as it may seem
A House of Commons briefing from earlier this month found in 2021 Russian imports made up 4% of the gas used in the UK 9% of oil and 27% of coal
Across the EU the equivalent figures were 39% for gas 23% for oil and 46% for coal
But the disruption to supply caused by the war in Ukraine combined with an increase in demand as countries look for alternative energy sources has still pushed up prices substantially on international markets
This has caused the spikes in what were all paying to heat and power our homes
It has also led to the government trying to convince countries like Saudi Arabia to step up energy production in a bid to calm the markets
All that said this polling shows that a strong response to Russia over Ukraine is still a vote winner with the public
In fact you can make a convincing argument that the initial muscular approach adopted by Boris Johnson was the main reason he was able to cling onto power in Downing Street for quite so long.
Ipsos interviewed a representative sample of 1069 adults aged 1675 in Great Britain between 19 and 20 October for Sky News.
The poll suggests that public support for Britains role in assisting Ukraine remains high with 59% of people in favour of sending arms and money to the country and 58% saying that the UK should accept more Ukrainian refugees.
However increases in energy bills since March have left public support for sanctions more fragile than before.
Respondents also identified excessive corporate profits global economic headwinds and UK interest rates as key causes of the costofliving crisis.
One in four (25%) said they were very concerned about being unable to pay their bills over the next six months with a further 45% fairly concerned.
Were sanctions to lead to an increase in energy bills they would no longer enjoy support across all parts of society as they have done so far.
Half of people in relatively secure financial positions (48%) would continue to back sanctions with only 27% opposed.
Among those struggling most with the cost of living however the number of people against sanctions would be larger than the number of people in favour.
For now however Britains sympathies lie overwhelmingly with Ukraine
Just 63% of respondents said they were very concerned about the impact of the war on themselves personally compared to 82% who said they were worried for Ukrainian civilians.
Three in four people (74%) are also concerned about the possible implications of the war for Britains national security.
Although additional price increases would dent support for sanctions most people (52%) would still back the measures if they led to prices remaining at their current high level for longer.
Even among those who said they were finding it difficult to get by at the moment 45% said they would be willing to endure continued high prices for the sake of supporting Ukraine with 30% disagreeing.
Although there is concern about the impact of the war on Britains economy most continue to support sanctions and think they are necessary even with higher energy and food prices.
However there is some evidence that support for sanctions in the face of rising energy and food prices may not be limitless if they continue to rise even further over time.
Ipsos interviewed a representative sample of 1069 adults aged 1675 in Great Britain
The Data and Forensics team is a multiskilled unit dedicated to providing transparent journalism from Sky News
We gather analyse and visualise data to tell datadriven stories
We combine traditional reporting skills with advanced analysis of satellite images social media and other open source information
Through multimedia storytelling we aim to better explain the world while also showing how our journalism is done.
Russia launched a fullscale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 eight years after annexing the Ukrainian region of Crimea
The war has put Georgia in a difficult position according to Colton
While much of the population supports Ukraine he explained the government is still hesitant to take any action that might create tension with Russia.
Colton said it was unlikely either side could fully prevail in the war.
The mercenaries then realize they have run out of ammunition.
In the shadow of the Kremlin
Wagner forces have for several years enjoyed global notoriety
Widely considered by analysts to be a Kremlinapproved private military company its fighters have battled in Ukraine since the Russian invasion in 2014 and in Syria as well as operating in several African countries including Sudan Libya Mozambique Mali and the Central African Republic.
As CNN has reported their deployments have often been key to Russian control of lucrative resources from Sudanese gold to Syrian oil.
Flaunting modern equipment in recruiting videos with heavy weapons and even helicopters they resemble US Special Forces.
Gabidullin employed by Wagner in Syria in 2015
Limited official information about Wagner and longstanding Kremlin denials about its existence and ties to the Russian state have only added to its infamy and allure while helping the group to cloud analysis of its exact capabilities and activities.
Lack of experience
He said many key Wagner personnel may like him have previously fought in Ukraine as well as in Syria gaining valuable combat experience alien to most regular Russian troops.
The mercenaries can earn up to $5000 per month.
Yusov also said that Wagner is increasingly being used to patch holes in the Russian front line
This was also confirmed by a US senior defense official who added that Wagner is being used across different front lines unlike Chechen fighters for instance who are focused around the Russian offensive aimed at Bakhmut.
Bodycam footage purportedly from Wagner fighters in August passed to CNN by the Ukrainian defense ministry shows mercenaries complaining of a lack of body armor and helmets
In another video a fighter complains about orders to attack Ukrainian positions when his unit is out of ammunition.
Billboards have sprung up in Russia calling for new recruits to Wagner
A Wagner recruitment billboard in Russia part of the groups recent public recruitment.
Even Putin ally Yevgeny Prigozhin finally admitted his role as Wagner chief in late September having spent years trying to distance himself from the mercenary group through repeated denials and even taking Russian media outlets investigating him to court.
In contrast to its image as a military elite organization a Wagner recruiter had one startling admission regarding recruits when contacted by a CNN journalist: no military experience necessary.
Yevgeny Prigozhin pictured in 2016 has acknowledged being the founder of the Wagner private military group
Alexander Zemlianichenko-AP
Working on Ukrainian investigations into possible Russian war crimes Belousov fears that this lax recruiting will see the scale of war crimes increase.
He himself says he had served three years in prison for murder and told CNN of prominent Wagner commanders who had served around the world with the group after prison sentences.
The enemy is within
For one mercenary who contacted Gabidullin for advice that incompetence was too much
In one clip a fallen Wagner mercenary lies in death almost peacefully his left hand gently gripping the black earth
Around him the battlefield smolders alongside dead bodies and the flaming wreckage of their armored vehicles
Occasional shots crackle through the smoke.
This week the largest part of the reports is the list of settlements liberated from the enemy within the scope of our ongoing defensive operation
The story of the liberation of Lyman in the Donetsk region has now become the most popular in the media
But the successes of our soldiers are not limited to Lyman said Ukraines President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on Sunday that the success of Ukraines soldiers is not limited to the recapture of Lyman in the northeast of the country with more towns around Kherson being liberated.
This week the largest part of the reports is the list of settlements liberated from the enemy within the scope of our ongoing defensive operation
The story of the liberation of Lyman in the Donetsk region has now become the most popular in the media
But the successes of our soldiers are not limited to Lyman he said in his nightly address
Ukrainian forces are also liberating the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region he said.
Ukraine is continuing its counteroffensive in the northeast of the country as it tries to reclaim more occupied land from Russia which last Friday announced it was annexing four regions in Ukraine a move branded as illegitimate and farcical by the international community.
Over the weekend Ukraine announced that its forces had fully taken back control of the town of Lyman which had been used as a key logistics hub by Russian forces marking another significant win for Kyiv
Russias Defense Ministry said that it had withdrawn its forces from the town to prevent them from being encircled.
Russia said that British navy personnel blew up the Nord Stream pipelines
Britain on Monday warned Russian President Vladimir Putin of severe consequences if Moscow uses nuclear weapons in Ukraine saying such a step would change the nature of the conflict.
Foreign Secretary James Cleverly also urged Russia not to impede grain exports and said that increasingly desperate statements from the Kremlin were designed to distract from its faltering war effort.
No other country is talking about nuclear use
No country is threatening Russia or President Putin Cleverly told lawmakers.
He should be clear that for the UK and our Allies any use at all of nuclear weapons would change the nature of the conflict
There would be severe consequences for Russia.
Russias defence ministry said on Saturday that British navy personnel blew up the Nord Stream gas pipelines last month.
The Russian ministry also said that British specialists from the same unit directed Ukrainian drone attacks on ships of Russian Black Sea fleet in Crimea on Saturday
Cleverly did not directly reference those comments
Without detailing what he was referring to he said: Now the Kremlin is resorting to peddling false claims churning out invented stories that say more about the fractures within Russias government than they do about us.
(Except for the headline this story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is published from a syndicated feed.)
Why did this happen?
Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading
For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.
On October 10 Russia rained dozens of missile strikes on the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv and some nine other cities many deep into the country and away from the battlefield
The strikes killed at least 14 people and injured more than 90 others according to Ukrainian officials and in the days since Russia has continued to strike military and energy infrastructure targets across the country.
Seven months in the war remains unpredictable as Russia and Ukraine seek to advance their own interests before the harsh winter ahead
Late last month Putin announced that Russia had in an illegal move annexed four occupied regions in Ukraine
On October 19 he declared martial law in those territories
Despite those two proclamations Ukraine has actually expanded the territory it controls and Russian troops retreated from the city of Lyman
Ukrainian also gained ground in Kherson one of the regions that Putin had annexed
Putin had already mobilized hundreds of thousands of Russians as just as many Russians seem to be fleeing the country to avoid fighting in the conflict.
But there are still big questions about where the war goes from here and what will shape the conflict this winter and onward
To understand them I spoke with experts on Europe Russia and international security and listened to European leaders speaking candidly on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly last month.
1) Will war fatigue overtake Europe and the US?
The war is being fought in Ukraine and Ukrainians are certainly suffering the most
Western support for Ukraine is a crucial variable
The sanctions that the US Western Europe and some Asian countries have imposed on Russia continue to have a boomerang effect on the world economy
The winter ahead will change the fighting conditions on the ground and equally importantly the cold weather will remind Europe of its dependence on Russian fossil fuels for heat
If inflation continues and the energy crisis looms will the US and an at times divided Europe become fatigued with the war and become less inclined to support it?
The US has sent more than $17 billion in military assistance to Ukraine
Some defense experts are warning that the conflict is consuming weapons stockpiles faster than nations can refill them.
Another recent survey of 14 countries in Europe and North America from the German Marshall Fund found that in Italy France and Canada climate is viewed as the primary security challenge while the countries closer to Russia and Ukraine on the eastern edges of Europe named Russia or wars between countries
Nathalie Tocci director of the Istituto Affari Internazionali in Rome told me that the European Commission has not held up its commitments
She says the sluggishness in disbursing economic aid to Ukraine is partly political but mostly due to bureaucratic hurdles.
So far European countries even Hungary have largely supported Ukraine
But for European leaders staunchly backing Ukraine political challenges may emerge as the war further exacerbates domestic economic issues
French President Emmanuel Macron lost his parliamentary majority in June
Since the Cold War the US has put most of its military and diplomatic focus on first the Middle East and then more recently Asia
The Biden administration has been hugely successful in dispatching US diplomats to unify Europe but Washington is still operating with a deficit on the continent and without a deep understanding of a sustainable longterm Europe policy.
2) What risks is Putin willing to take?
His unpredictability is a major X factor.
That could mean an increasingly desperate Putin
Nowhere has that desperation been more apparent than in the rhetoric surrounding nuclear weapons
That would be normshattering and earthshattering figuratively and literally
Even threatening to use a nuke violates the norms of international relations.
Putin has emphasized that the United States was the only country that had used a nuclear weapon (twice) on Japan during World War II
Another concern is if things continue to go badly for Putin whether he will expand the theater of war to other fronts and countries.
In the category of desperate acts falls what may potentially be an act of selfsabotage a Russian attack on the Nord Stream gas pipeline
It raises concerns that Russia may attack other critical energy infrastructure in Europe.
The nationalists in Russia according to McGlynn may pose the biggest threat to Putin as they push him toward even more extreme means
The extent to which Putin might be willing to repress Russians is also important
The calling up of reserves is one indicator as is the shuttering of the independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta and other media outlets and the arrests of critics and activists
That intensity of repression also limits the possibility for Russian domestic opposition standing up to Putin.
3) What is the definition of Ukraine winning?
The country that so many analysts predicted would fall in the first week of the invasion in February has endured the first 200 days of war and Ukrainians say they are confident in carrying on the fight so long as they have ample support from the West.
Not because Ukrainians are so brave or have so many resources she explained
But there is a great deal of confusion as to how anyone defines victory
While the Ukrainians have expanded their demands in light of their successful counteroffensive and are now talking about nothing short of retaking the territory Russian has occupied since 2014 the United States and each European country seem to hold their own perspective
And now he has annexed four provinces that he has long sought
That would mean stretching the war on as long as possible hence the massive mobilization and the possibility of a war of attrition
In Washington meanwhile there has been little talk of what diplomacy among the parties might look like
More communication could help
And the recent Data for Progress survey emphasized that a majority of Americans would like to see more diplomacy
In the meantime Biden national security adviser Jake Sullivan hosted talks between senior officials from Azerbaijan and Armenia last month but the Biden administration has hardly been discussing avenues for diplomacy with Russia.
The US has alienated broad swaths of the Russian population through sanctions and Biden has framed the conflict as an existential one between democracy and autocracy.
Image Cycling past a destroyed Russian tank in the recently liberated village of PiskyRadkivski on Monday
Ivor Prickett for The New York Times
Still in full combat uniform with body armor and boots he had been missed by the crews gathering the dead.
A week after Ukrainian troops seized back the village of PiskyRadkivski in the Kharkiv region in a sweeping counteroffensive that forced Russian troops into retreat across northeastern Ukraine the horror of war was all too evident.
Putin of Russia said last week his country was annexing and treating as its own
The battle lasted just one day in PiskyRadkivski but the power and accuracy of the Ukrainian assault was evident
Burnedout tanks sat still in their positions at a crossroads and in the woods at the northern edge of the village
Russian uniforms sleeping bags and rations lay abandoned among the fir trees opposite Ms
Ukrainian artillery knocked out the tanks and killed at least eight Russian soldiers here said Anatolii 52 a retired engineer whose house was damaged in the strikes
Most of the bodies had been removed by professional crews who tour the battle zone in white vans emblazoned with a red cross and the number 200 the code the military has used since Soviet times for cargo of dead soldiers
But they had not picked up the body by the tree which was missing its head.
On a road past several villages to the south a forensic team was picking up Russian bodies at the scene of an ambush
A Ukrainian soldier protested but the forensic team explained quietly that Russian bodies could be exchanged for Ukrainian soldiers
The soldier helped lift a decomposed body into a black body bag then leaned over to retch in the grass.
Down the road soldiers from a Ukrainian tank crew pulled up near the body of another dead Russian soldier who lay twisted where he had fallen his face blackened and his body swollen.
Weary and dirty the tank crew showed little concern for the Russian bodies but seemed tense and angry from their recent battles
They had been fighting for 51 days without a break and were still wearing their summer uniforms said one of them who gave his code name as Positiv.
While fantasies can be created about the encroachment of NATO as driving Putins decision process leading to launching his war the reality is that he started the war because he thought he would win
If he had seen prospects for failure he would not have started the war.
Putin appears to have made the decision to gain control of Ukraine in 2011
Aleksey Kudrin resigned then as finance minister because Putin made the decision to abandon modernisation of the Russian economy to opt for military buildup to restore Russian power
At that point NATO had no defensive doctrine against Russian aggression in Europe
A Russian invasion of Ukraine would have been viewed as highly implausible
France was ready to sell Russia Mistral assault ships and Germany and other NATO members were cutting deals with Russia.
Concurrently Ukrainians were seeking a pathway to Europe
The autonomous Crimean government opened tourism offices in European cities and the proRussia Yanukovych government negotiated an Association Agreement with the EU
The parliament of Ukraine had approved the Association agreement 319 votes out of 449 possible in May 2013
Gallup polls in Crimea in May 2013 showed 52% preferred to be an autonomous republic of Ukraine 22% had a preference for Russia while 20% preferred sovereignty.
Having made the decision to not modernize the economy Putin doubled down on oil gas and other resources as central to the Russian economy
In effect Putin bet Russias future on fossil fuels while the international community was readying to sign the Paris Climate agreement aimed at reducing fossil fuel use.
As winter approached Putin pressured Yanukovych to abandon the agreement with the EU and to choose Russias Eurasian Union
The parliament was not involved in this decision
As Putin no doubt expected massive demonstrations resulted that Yanukovych could not stop without bloodshed
This created conditions for Putin to move on Ukraine
If civil war had broken out Putin could have responded to restore order
The demonstrators however resisted the provocations that were launched
When Yanukovych showed willingness to negotiate with the demonstrators snipers killed nearly 100 people foreclosing sealing Yanukovychs fate
He was no longer useful to Putin and he opposed Russian annexation of Crimea.
Igor Girkin was sent to the Donbas to start a war after the successful annexation of Crimea
Girkin boasted that the people did not want to fight until he Strelkov made war unavoidable
Strelkov was removed a few months later because Putin was not yet ready to fight to control Ukraine
That would take further buildup of the military the construction of the Kerch bridge and more.
In 2022 Putins intelligence showed that Russian forces would take Kyiv in days and install Yanukovych as the legitimate president of Ukraine with sufficient Russian forces available to suppress any resistance
The intelligence was highly flawed because the Russian intelligence services were highly corrupt
Money intended to payoff people in Ukraine had been diverted to personal accounts
The planned coup failed and Zelensky chose to stay and fight.
Putin has made terribly serious mistakes
He offers no possibility of stabilizing Eurasia and as a result is no longer useful to China is a danger to Europe and a burden to his own people.
Ukraines counteroffensive in the east and south of the country continues to build momentum with President Zelenskyy announcing last night that there were new liberated settlements in several regions.
On Monday Ukrainian forces saw more successes on the battlefield pushing through Russian defenses in the south of the country as well as consolidating their hold on territory around Lyman in the eastern Donetsk region and looking to push further into neighboring Luhansk.
President Putin announced Russia was annexing both regions last Friday as well as Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in the south but Moscows hold on them looks increasingly fragile with none of the regions fully occupied by Russian forces.
In his nightly address the Ukrainian president said fierce fighting continues in many areas of the front but said an increasing number of occupying forces were trying to escape and more and more losses are being inflicted on the enemy army.
Zelenskyy said Russian men who had been mobilized to fight in Ukraine just a few weeks ago were already dying in Ukraine.
Meanwhile the U.S
committed even more firepower to Ukraines fight as the Biden administration announced another $625 million in military aid to Kyiv
As locker rooms have reopened to the media this season those players are more accessible
One Russian player told ESPN that he was in an impossible situation.
The media wants us to talk just so they can get us to say things to fit their story the player said
But they dont actually understand the situation or what its like for our families or whats actually going on
If I say I am proud of where I am from and I love being Russian I am painted as a bad guy  even if I do not support the war
So what am I supposed to do lie?
Thats why the player said its easiest not to say anything at all
He also noted that the topic of war hasnt been brought up by his teammates in the locker room or on road trips as we just focus on our jobs and that is hockey.
People want [our players] to speak up in a certain way but youre not going to tell someone how to think politically  just like how you avoid conversations about religion or politics at Thanksgiving one GM with multiple Russian players on his roster told ESPN
Its conflicting for the athletes and a weird dynamic.
For Russian players the biggest concern has been their own security as well as the security of their families
According to several sources some teams  especially teams with strong resources  are doing things behind the scenes to help support Russian players
That includes helping obtain visas for family members and even helping them relocate.
The war hasnt affected contracts for current NHL players but it has affected their overall earnings
The equipment manufacturer CCM for example stopped using Russian players in all global marketing campaigns
According to several NHL marketing agents there are very few brands looking to do new business with Russianborn players as they wait out the climate
There are however expected to be marketing activations around Washington Capitals captain Alex Ovechkin this season as he closes in on Gordie Howe on the alltime scoring chart.
Ovechkin has been a topic of conversation throughout the war given his previous vocal support for Vladimir Putin  and the fact that he still appears with Putin in his Instagram profile picture
But those closest to Ovechkin have maintained that the dynamics for one of Russias most wellknown athletes are complex and there are still concerns over his family back home which is one of the reasons he hasnt changed his photo.
Travel for Russian players
But I think a lot of us were holding our breath just making sure there were no hiccups.
The process for reapplying for visas was much more complicated  and slower  than in years past.
consulate in Moscow has suspended visa services so many Russianborn players flew to other countries to get their paperwork approved which caused a few headaches
But as one agent said That was on the U.S
government  they are the ones that made it more difficult.
Watch NHL games on ESPN networks This season will include 103 exclusive regularseason games across ESPN ESPN+ Hulu and ABC
When the San Jose Sharks and Nashville Predators opened their season in Prague as part of the NHL Global Series the Czech foreign ministry initially told the league that Russian players would not be welcome because of the war in Ukraine.
The Sharks from GM Mike Grier to captain Logan Couture drew a hard stance publicly: If the Russians couldnt go the entire team would not go.
The Czech government eventually dropped its attempted ban
The Predators Yakov Trenin and the Sharks Evgeny Svechnikov played in Prague (Alexander Barabanov didnt play because he was injured)
According to people close to the players they did not experience any hostility and were even stopped for photographs and autographs by fans during the trip.
At the league level
The NHL condemned the Russian government shortly after Februarys invasion and ended all business relations in Russia  including its Russianlanguage website media and sponsorship deals
The league office was also quick to separate the acts of the Russian government with the leagues Russian players
The NHL said it would support its players including adding extra security which has continued this season.
The NHL and NHLPA have been working with the IIHF on hosting a World Cup of Hockey in February 2024
The IIHF has banned Russia from international events but the NHL and NHLPA are hopeful that they could find a solution  such as having Russian athletes compete under a neutral name or flag
But deputy commissioner Bill Daly said other participating countries dont view that as satisfactory and are advocating for no Russian player participation at all.
Especially since the NHL didnt go to the last two Olympics playing in this tournament is deeply personal for Russian players agent Dan Milstein who represents a majority of the Russian players in the NHL told ESPN
I will be working closely with everyone involved to find a solution here
We will fight until the end
This is a very important issue for the players and not including them is absolutely unfair.
One concern for the NHL is its relationship with the Kontinental Hockey League a league that includes teams from several countries but the large majority of them are based in Russia
The KHL which is widely considered the secondbest hockey league in the world has been on good terms with the NHL
The NHL had been considering sending a team to Russia for exhibition games or reintroducing a KHL-NHL crossover event
Those discussions are on indefinite hold with the league ending all business relations with Russia.
The KHL and NHL had a memorandum of understanding that required each league to respect each others player contracts
No KHL team has violated that memorandum but many NHL executives wondered whether that might change
I want to see what happens this current season Daly told ESPN in August
I dont really know one way or the other yet.
One NHL executive presented this scenario: If a player isnt happy with his playing time or down to the AHL whos to say he doesnt just bolt home and sign a contract over there? Thats a real possibility now.
One player in particular who was caught up in the geopolitical maelstrom: Flyers prospect Ivan Fedotov who was expected to compete for Philadelphias backup goaltending position this season
Fedotov played last season for the KHLs CSKA Moscow which is considered an extension of the Russian Army
Fedotov signed a contract with the Flyers in May and two months later while skating at a rink in St
Petersburg he was arrested by a SWAT team and sent to a military base in Severomorsk
All men ages 1827 in Russia must serve in the military unless they have an official exemption which is usually university studies
Fedotov was detained on grounds of military evasion.
This type of snatching and sending young men to arctic bases has been used as retaliation against opposition figures in Russia Washington Post Russia correspondent Mary Ilyushina explained to ESPN
In this case it may not have to do with opposition but rather abandoning a Russia club for an American one.
Fedotov hired a military lawyer who reported that Fedotov was hospitalized after receiving some kind of injections. Fedotov has since been transferred to another base
His legal team dropped his appeal for the charges of evasion and according to sources he is hopeful that after serving a year in the military he will be released and allowed to come to the United States to begin his NHL career.
This is a case the league is following closely as it could be the first example of the NHL and KHL memorandum being violated
Considering CSKA Moscows relationship with the military its possible Fedotov could be required to play for CSKA Moscow.
One general manager said hes not as concerned for wellestablished veterans but more so for the prospects and younger players in the league
They seem more susceptible to getting caught up with military service et cetera the GM said
And of course there is now the real concern  one that we used to have for years but had gone away of late  about getting those guys over here and signing contracts
The draft and Russian prospects
Many in the scouting community predicted that Russians would be shut out of the first round of the 2022 NHL draft for the first time since 2005
However three Russian players were selected in the first round in July: Pavel Mintyukov (Anaheim Ducks No
10) Ivan Miroshnichenko (Washington Capitals No
20) and Danila Yurov (Minnesota Wild No
Its much easier for NHL teams to draft players already playing in North America like Minyukov and Yurov who were in the Ontario Hockey League.
Miroshnichenko is more of a risk
He was once projected as a lottery pick but dropped because he was still in Russia playing in the second division last season and because he will miss the 202223 season after being diagnosed with nonHodgkins lymphoma
The Capitals viewed his draft selection as a gamble but the upside was too much to pass up.
Matvei Michkov is considered a topthree pick in the 2023 draft and his stock will be interesting to monitor as he plays this season for SKA St
Petersburg in the KHL
Several NHL teams have pulled scouts from Russia but its hard to gauge how many organizations have a Russian presence as some teams may have consultants on payroll
Either way Michkov will go the entire season with very few people from NHL organizations having eyes on him
Scouts say it helps that Michkov has played in wellattended tournaments over the past two years such as the HlinkaGretzky Cup and the 2021 world juniors in Texas.
Michkov is under contract with the KHL through the 202526 season
At those tournaments he looked like a worldclass talent someone worthy of going toptwo three of the draft one veteran amateur scout said
But I wouldnt be shocked if theres a precipitous drop simply because of the circumstance.
On 29 October Russia withdrew from the Black Sea Grain Initiative causing the blockage of around 200 vessels with grain
The UN Turkey and Ukraine agreed a transit plan for 16 ships on 31 October.
Missile attacks on energy infrastructure were recorded on 31 October in Kyiv causing power and water supply outages
Explosions were reported in Kharkiv Cherkasy Kirovohrad and Chernivtsi targeting energy facilities and critical infrastructure
Zaporizhzhia was also struck by attacks facing electricity cutoffs.
According to the Ukrainian authorities 1 million displaced people are staying in collective centres across the country requiring support for winterisation.
Russian leaders know full well that depriving civilians of heating and electricity on the eve of a cold winter will result in large numbers of deaths.
The prospect of a humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine now demands the kind of tough and urgent response from the international community that has often been lacking.
For the past eight years the West has consistently lagged behind events and handed the initiative to the Kremlin as Russia has escalated its aggression against Ukraine
Long before the current fullscale invasion began on February 24 Kyiv was imploring its Western partners to provide heavy weapons and air defense systems
Name This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.
Will the current generation make the same mistake?
Recent history suggests this is a genuine possibility
Even now more than eight months since Russia unleashed the largest European conflict since World War II selfstyled realists continue to advocate policies of appeasement
Again and again peace plans are proposed that ask nothing of Russia while calling on Kyiv to cede Ukrainian land in exchange for peace in Europe.
Efforts to appease Putin are fundamentally flawed
It is also important for Western leaders to understand that Putin is escalating because he is losing the war
The Russian army has suffered catastrophic losses and is deeply demoralized.
Faced with defeat on the battlefield Putin is seeking to raise the stakes and is directly threatening the entire Ukrainian civilian population
This means supplying the air defense systems and other military hardware Ukraine desperately needs.
This may take longer than expected and could lead to growing Ukraine fatigue in Western capitals
Nevertheless it is both morally and strategically the right thing to do.
This victory would have farreaching repercussions for the wider region
Crucially the survival of the Ukrainian nation would serve as a severe blow to the imperial mindset that remains dominant in modern Russia
This is a necessary step if postwar Russia is ever to establish normal relations with its neighbors.
The alternative would be disastrous for the entire Western world
If Russia is victorious in Ukraine Putin will embark on further international aggression geared towards subjugating his neighbors and undermining the West
The current Cold War will continue indefinitely while the nightmare scenario of a direct military conflict between Russia and the West will loom ever larger
Putin is already committing genocide in Ukraine and is now openly threatening to freeze millions of civilians to death
The price of peace will continue to rise until he is decisively defeated.
Dennis Soltys is a retired Canadian professor of public policy living in Almaty
Alexander Motyl is a professor of political science at Rutgers University Newark.
The views expressed in UkraineAlert are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Atlantic Council its staff or its supporters.
Follow us on social media
and support our work support our work
Russian President Vladimir Putin delivers a speech during the 19th Annual Meeting of the Valdai Discussion Club in Moscow
Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading
From 20 Oct 2022 12.53 EDT UK sanctions Iran over drones used in Russian attacks on Ukraine The UK is implementing new sanctions on three Iranian individuals and a business responsible for supplying Russia with drones used to bombard Ukraine according to a statement from the foreign office
Tehran denies supplying the drones to Moscow while the Kremlin denied its forces had used Iranian drones to attack Ukraine on Tuesday
The wreckage of what Kyiv has described as an Iranian Shahed drone downed near Kupiansk Ukraine
Shahed Aviation Industries which the UK says manufactured the drones is subject to an asset freeze
Today we are sanctioning those who have supplied the drones used by Russia to target Ukrainian civilians
We are sanctioning the suppliers of drones used for the cowardly strikes on civilian targets and critical infrastructure in Ukraine
The Russian installed head of the key southern city Vladimir Saldo spoke of plans to move up to 60000 people across the Dnipro River
Images of people using boats to flee the city were broadcast by Russian state TV
A number have reported receiving mass text messages warning the city would be shelled and informing them that buses would be leaving from the port from 7am on Thursday
A barrage of more than 300 attacks have destroyed a third of all power plants across the country President Zelenskiy said
Civilians removed from the Russiancontrolled Kherson region of Ukraine arrive in Dzhankoi in northern Crimea
The assets of all four have been frozen and the individuals are also subject to travel bans.
A Russian aircraft released a missile near a British plane patrolling in international airspace over the Black Sea on 29 September the UK defence secretary Ben Wallace revealed
Scorched earth tactics will not help Russia win the war
It comes hours after the UK followed the EU in implementing sanctions on one Iranian business and three individuals
Russia and Iran are both violating a UN security council resolution that controls the transfer of these weapons from Iran the foreign office said
He also threatened Russia would withdraw from the grain deal that has allowed Ukrainian grain to be transported out of Black Sea ports
He also accused Russia of sometimes acting recklessly by flying as close as 15ft (4.6 metres) to Nato aircraft
The episode on 29 September has prompted Wallace to ensure that routine UK surveillance flights over the Black Sea in place since 2019 were now escorted by armed aircraft
20 Oct 2022 12.53 EDT UK sanctions Iran over drones used in Russian attacks on Ukraine The UK is implementing new sanctions on three Iranian individuals and a business responsible for supplying Russia with drones used to bombard Ukraine according to a statement from the foreign office
Tehran denies supplying the drones to Moscow while the Kremlin denied its forces had used Iranian drones to attack Ukraine on Tuesday
The wreckage of what Kyiv has described as an Iranian Shahed drone downed near Kupiansk Ukraine
Shahed Aviation Industries which the UK says manufactured the drones is subject to an asset freeze
Today we are sanctioning those who have supplied the drones used by Russia to target Ukrainian civilians
We are sanctioning the suppliers of drones used for the cowardly strikes on civilian targets and critical infrastructure in Ukraine
Three energy facilities were destroyed by Russia on Wednesday the president added with a further strike reported in the region of the southern city of Kryvyi Rih overnight amid growing official alarm over the impact of the Russian campaign
20 Oct 2022 12.25 EDT Russia has raided $16.2bn from its main foreign wealth fund to cover its budget deficit AFP reports as the invasion of Ukraine continues to weigh heavily on its public finances
Russian federal government spending from January to September increased by 21% from the same period last year according to finance ministry data
A government forecast published last month put the budget deficit this year at 0.9% of GDP
20 Oct 2022 12.10 EDT Russia has said the Red Cross had permission to visit a notorious prison where dozens of Ukrainian PoWs died in a July bombing strike but was blocked by the security situation
The ICRC said it shares in the frustration but stressed that it could only conduct visits when it was granted authorisation and security guarantees
Each side in the conflict has blamed the other for the deadly 29 July strikes while the United Nations has warned of dire sanitary conditions for those remaining in the facility
In a statement on Friday the ICRC said they had been seeking access to the prison but they did not have the ability to force their way in
Under the Geneva Conventions all parties to international armed conflicts are required to grant the ICRC access to all PoWs to assess their situation.
Ukraine has deployed a host of weaponry to bring down the drones including MiG29 jets C300 cruise missiles Nasams ground defence systems and smallarms fire
The data includes drones launched between 13 September and 17 October
He encouraged people to cross over to the left bank of the Dnieper to safety and posted a video of a column of buses
But Stremousov called on the people of Kherson to follow Moscowbacked instructions
On Wednesday the Russian president Vladimir Putin introduced martial law in the four Ukrainian regions he claims to have annexed: Kherson Zaporizhzhia Lugansk and Donetsk
Civilians removed from the Russiancontrolled Kherson region of Ukraine arrive in the town of Dzhankoi in northern Crimea
Russias Shoigu told his Western counterparts Kyiv is preparing a nuclear dirty bomb attack
He also spoke to US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin in their second call in three days but a terse Russian readout of that call did not say whether the dirty bomb claim was also mentioned in their conversation.
It does not have the devastating effect of a nuclear explosion but it could expose broad areas to radioactive contamination.
London strongly rejected the claims.
Russian authorities repeatedly have made allegations that Ukraine could detonate a dirty bomb in a false flag attack and blame it on Moscow
Ukrainian authorities in turn have accused the Kremlin of hatching such a plan.
Kherson separatists order residents to leave immediately
Moscowinstalled authorities urged residents in the southern Kherson region  which the Kremlin claims to have annexed  to leave the main city in the face of Kyivs advancing counteroffensive.
Due to the tense situation on the front the increased danger of mass shelling of the city and the threat of terrorist attacks all civilians must immediately leave the city and cross to the left bank of the Dnipro river the regions Russianinstalled authorities said on social media on Saturday.
A Moscowinstalled official in Kherson Kirill Stremousov told the Russian news agency Interfax that around 25000 people had made the crossing.
Kyivs forces have been advancing along the west bank of the Dnipro river towards the Kherson regions eponymous main city.
Thousands left without electricity after latest Russian strikes
Russia launched a massive missile attack on Saturday targeting critical infrastructure Ukrainian authorities said leaving hundreds of thousands of people in central and western parts of the country without electricity.
Using drones and missiles alike Moscow has intensified its strikes on power stations water supply systems and other key infrastructure across the country the latest phase of the war as it nears the eightmonth mark.
At least 18 of 33 cruise missiles launched from air and sea were down on Saturday Ukraines air force said in a statement
Ukrainian authorities said the air defence shot down at least another dozen Iranianmade drones overnight on Sunday.
The presidential office said in its morning statement that five explosiveladen drones were downed in the central Cherkasy region southeast of Kyiv.
Ukraines state energy company Ukrenergo claimed in a statement that Saturdays attacks caused damage comparable to or exceeding the consequences of the attack on 1012 October  the strikes the Kremlin conducted in retaliation for the bombing of Crimeas Kerch bridge.
Russia deliberately delaying Ukrainian grain exports
Volodymyr Zelenskyy accused Russia of deliberately delaying the passage of ships loaded with Ukrainian grain on Friday restricting vital supplies for many countries in Africa and Asia.
More than 150 ships are in a queue to fulfil contractual obligations to supply our agricultural products said the Ukrainian President.
This is an artificial queue which has arisen only because Russia deliberately delays the passage of ships.
China Egypt Bangladesh Indonesia Iraq and Lebanon are the main countries impacted by the blockages which involve about three million tons of food.
Russia and Ukraine agreed in July to resume Ukrainian grain exports that had been languishing in silos since the start of the war in February.
Russia later criticised the deal  brokered by the UN and Turkey  saying its own exports were hampered by the sanctions.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen speaks during a media conference at an EU summit in Brussels
EU agrees to increase its financial support to Ukraine
This comes after Zelenskyys warnings that Russia is trying to spark a refugee exodus by destroying Ukraines energy infrastructure.
As a result of the plan the 27nation bloc would now match US financial support for the wartorn Eastern European country.
That figure would be met in equal part by the EU and the US with additional money coming from international financial institutions she said.
It is very important to Ukraine to have a predictable and stable flow of income von der Leyen told reporters.
Zelenskyy urges West to pressure Russia into not destroying dam
The Ukrainian leader urged the West to warn Russia not to blow up a huge dam that would flood a large part of southern Ukraine as his forces prepared to push Moscows troops from Kherson in one of the wars most important battles.
In a television address Zelenskyy said Russian forces had planted explosives inside the huge Nova Kakhovka dam which holds back an enormous reservoir dominating much of southern Ukraine.
A Russianinstalled official in the region Vladimir Leontyev said on Thursday that Ukrainian forces had launched five missile strikes against the dam and hydroelectric power station about 70 kilometres from Kherson city.
He said on Russian TV that if the facilities were destroyed a critical canal providing water to annexed Crimea would be cut off.
Zelenskyy has claimed Russia mined the dam and power station with plans to blow them up in what he called a terrorist act.
The Ukrainian president warned this could unleash 18 million cubic metres of water flooding Kherson and dozens of areas where hundreds of thousands of people live
He told the European Council Russia would then try to blame Ukraine.
Russian regions bordering Ukraine set up defensive fortifications
The governor of the Kursk region of Russia Roman Starovoit said on Sunday that two lines of defence had been set up in the region bordering Ukraine to counter a possible attack by Ukrainian forces.
This week work on two reinforced defence lines in the Kursk region was completed Starovoit wrote on Telegram saying a third defence line should be built by 5 November.
We are ready to face any attack on our territory he said.
For his part the governor of the Russian region of Belgorod which also borders Ukraine announced on Saturday the start of defensive entrenchment in his region.
In the Belgorod region we have started to build defensive fortifications Vyacheslav Gladkov said on Telegram posting photos of several concrete blocks in the shape of a pyramid installed on the outskirts of a village.
Moscow denounced in midOctober a considerable increase in Ukrainian fire on several Russian border regions including Belgorod but also Kursk and Bryansk.
On Saturday two people were killed in Ukrainian strikes against civilian infrastructure in the Belgorod region and about 15000 people were left without electricity for several hours according to local authorities.
Ukrainian authorities have rejected the accusations
Euronews could not independently confirm any of the claims.
Already many countries of eastern Europe are wary of President Macron who they believe was far too indulgent towards Russias Vladimir Putin in the first months of the war
A narrative has taken root according to which France still feels ambivalent about an outright Ukrainian triumph.
Yuri Kochetkov-EPA via Shutterstock
The latest salvo came on Thursday when a Russianinstalled occupation official in Ukraine upbraided the Russian defense minister Sergei K
Shoigu a close associate of Mr
The official Kirill Stremousov said Mr
Stremousov the deputy governor of the Kherson region of southern Ukraine.
But after Russian forces were forced to retreat in two other sections of the front line in the last week prominent officials have increasingly joined the chorus.
Kartapolov said on Wednesday
Shoigu who has vacationed with Mr
Putin in Siberia has yet to respond to the criticism and Mr
Putin has not commented on it
There were indications that the criticism was part of infighting in the Russian ruling elite that was spilling into the open
It comes on the heels of a tirade against the military leadership that Ramzan Kadyrov the strongman ruler of the southern Russian republic of Chechnya published over the weekend.
While none of the prominent prowar critics of the military have attacked Mr
Putin personally the Kremlin could still lose control of the situation if Russian battlefield losses continue said Tatiana Stanovaya a Russian political analyst.
Stanovaya the founder of R
Politik a political analysis firm
Many Russian hawks have been calling on the military for months to escalate its offensive
And while they celebrated Mr
From 6 Oct 2022 11.15 EDT Zelenskiy tells European leaders Ukraine must win to safeguard the EU Volodymyr Zelenskiy is speaking at the first meeting of the European Political Community today
Updated at 12.42 EDT
The meeting at the ancient Prague Castle was perceived as a grand show of solidarity for a continent grappling with multiple crises  from the security implications of the war in Ukraine to energy shortages and a looming recession.
The point from which Europe and the entire free world will move to guaranteed peace for all of us
Updated at 14.07 EDT
Unlike the wooded hills of the Donbas the land here is flat broad fields sectored by tree lines of acacia and oak poplars and eucalyptus
They provided meagre cover for the Russian armoured vehicles that can be see burned out in the distance sometimes several together.
Lines of Russian antitank mines strung together to close access to the road have been defused and pulled to one side of the carriageway
Everywhere the skeletal remnants of missiles that once carried cluster bombs stand like treestumps in the fields
One meadow is cratered every 20 metres by the dozen or so munitions that flew into it
Beyond that the road is heavily damaged
Updated at 14.04 EDT
In a press conference Grossi said: For us it is obvious that since it is a Ukrainian facility the ownership is Energoatom [the Ukrainian state nuclear agency]
We are an international organisation guided by international law and as you know very well annexations are not accepted under international law
Shelling has hit the vicinity in recent months with Ukraine and Russia blaming each other for the attacks that have raised fears of a nuclear disaster.
Updated at 13.46 EDT
6 Oct 2022 12.43 EDT US president Joe Biden has said he would not rule out meeting with Vladimir Putin during the G20 summit next month in Asia
It is unclear whether Putin will attend the summit.
Updated at 12.52 EDT
Updated at 12.51 EDT
Stremousov said: Indeed many say: if they were a defence minister who had allowed such a state of affairs they could as officers have shot themselves
Updated at 12.28 EDT
6 Oct 2022 11.56 EDT Russian opposition politician Vladimir KaraMurza is being investigated for treason according to his lawyer.
They included an address to the Arizona House of Representatives in which he said Vladimir Putin was bombing Ukrainian homes hospitals and schools.
Moscow says it does not deliberately target civilians but thousands have been killed in Ukraine
On Thursday at least three people died when a Russian missile destroyed an apartment block in the city of Zaporizhzhia.
Updated at 12.29 EDT
the illegal annexation of those Ukrainian regions ..
It was the eighth packet of sanctions the EU has imposed on Russia since the Kremlin ordered the invasion of Ukraine in February
The last couple of sanction packets have been losing steam compared with earlier ones as leading Russian trade energy banking military and political sectors have already been hit
Updated at 12.06 EDT
Olga is 21 and a refugee from Ukraine where the Russian invasion has been raging since Februrary
Now living in West Seattle her journey has taken many turns and shes been a witness to the horrors of war
Out of concern for her safety and her family her last name is being withheld
Here is her story:
I was born in Sebastapol Crimea when it was still part of Ukraine and lived with my parents until they divorced.
My mom and I moved to a small village 18 km north of the capital Kyiv.
Villages in Ukraine are rural people living on what they can grow themselves
No internet access no cellphones nowhere near the major cities
Its a quiet life with pets and farm animals family often spread out as young people leave to make their way in the world.
My mother is a nurse and over the course of ten years we moved to two other villages as I grew up
I was a good student and graduated from high school with good enough grades to go to university
I took a small room in a dormitory in Kyiv
I also had a job at the time
I was close to getting my Bachelors Degree in Germanic Languages and Literature when the Russian invasion of Ukraine began in February of 2022.
It was 5 am and I was sleeping
My phone began ringing
It was my mom and she told me the war had begun
My first reaction was Maybe you took something wrong
It seemed like it was a bad joke or fake news from the internet
I thought ok I need to go to work because my boss will be disappointed
But I laid down again to sleep but my neighbor knocked on my door door two minutes later and said she got a similar call from her parents
We looked at each other in silence and we started to pack our things
We were thinking What can we do now since we didnt have much information
Nobody knew what to do
My mom told us we should move back up to our village and she thought that in a few days everything would be alright
My grandmother lived in a village that was closer to Kiev
So I tried to catch a bus to go to her house but everyone was trying to get out of the area
It was so crowded
I saw many families pack their clothes in the car and crowd on to buses but I dont have a car
I only had myself and I was just trying to survive
Communication became impossible when the Russians started to jam the signals
I went to stay with my grandmother we would go out together to run errands and do shopping
Then in March of 2022 I was not there for a time and her grandmother went out by herself
I heard the whistle of the rockets and feared the worst.
A neighbor came to where I was and knocked on the gate
My grandmother had been killed in the attack
I went to identify her body and it had been badly destroyed
The community at first buried her body in the yard but then later made her a coffin and gave her a proper burial.
With nowhere to go I hid in a neighbors cold basement as the Russian troops were occupying the village
I developed kidney problems and was sick
But after two weeks I had a chance to escape as the troops were leaving and made it to Lviv in western Ukraine
I contacted my grandmothers sister and took a train to where she lives in Italy and stayed for a month.
I had to find a way to start my life over
My cousin who lives in Seattle was able to help me move
She sponsored my Visa and made my flight arrangements
She used to work at Peel and Press in West Seattle and introduced me to Dan Austin the owner who gave me a job
Im very grateful to Dan for the opportunity
I feel very safe and welcome here
The people are very nice
My mom chose to stay in Ukraine since she is a nurse and has many patients
I talk with her when I can.
With this job and help from the government I was able to afford rent and financially support my mom
I am also studying at south Seattle college and working on getting a drivers license
I dont know if I want to become an American citizen yet
I dont want to be here illegally so the future is not clear
I would like to go back to Ukraine but right now of course its not safe
I had a classmate in what we call fourth form (high school) but he was in a hot zone in the war and a month ago I saw the news that he died.
The truth is on our side.
And maybe I can be an example.
I thought my life was horrible but now I really enjoy my life.
Russia repeats Ukrainian dirty bomb accusation
Moscow repeated claims on Monday that Ukraine is making a dirty bomb an allegation rebuffed by international experts.
Russias Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu first made the accusation on Sunday during a call with his US UK French and Turkish counterparts
He said Moscow was concerned about possible provocations by Ukraine involving a dirty bomb.
Kyiv has fiercely condemned these allegations inviting international inspectors to come and view its nuclear facilities.
A dirty bomb is made by packing conventional explosives with radioactive material which then spreads in the air once the device goes off.
According to the information we have two Ukrainian organisations have specific instructions for making the socalled dirty bomb said Russian General Igor Kirillov on Monday claiming their work had entered the final phase.
The purpose of this provocation is to accuse Russia of using weapons of mass destruction in Ukraine and thus to launch a powerful antiRussian campaign in the world he said.
Ukrainian officials immediately denied these allegations with the head of Ukraines diplomatic service Dmytro Kouleba calling them absurd and dangerous remarks.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy called on the world to react as harshly as possible to Russias accusations.
On Monday Kouleba said he spoke to the International Atomic Energy Agency and officially invited experts from the UN body to visit peaceful installations in Ukraine that Russia misleadingly claims are developing a dirty bomb.
Grossi has accepted said Kouleba
Unlike Russia Ukraine has always been and remains transparent
We have nothing to hide.
Paris London and Washington have lambasted Moscows false statements.
Ukraine claims success in downing drones
Ukrainian authorities on Monday tried to dampen public fears about Russias use of Iranianmade drones claiming it was getting better at shooting down the small aircraft.
Ukraines forces have shot down more than twothirds of the approximately 330 Shahid drones that Russia has used said the head of the Ukrainian intelligence service Kyrylo Budanov on Monday.
Budanov said Russias military had ordered about 1700 units of several different types of drones besides a second batch of about 300 Shahids which translates as martyr in Persian.
Both Russia and Iran deny that any Iranianmade drones have been used in the war.
Kremlin states Paris and Berlin have no desire to participate in peace talks
French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Olaf Scholz show no desire to enter peace talks over the Ukraine war the Kremlin claimed on Monday.
As for Macron and Scholz lately they have shown no desire to listen to the position of the Russian side and to participate in any efforts related to mediation said Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov while praising the position of Ankara.
Turkey shows its willingness to continue the mediation efforts which were highly appreciated by Russian President Vladimir Putin he added.
A member of NATO Turkey is very dependent on Russian gas and oil
It has tried to maintain a good relationship with both Ukraine and Russia since the start of the invasion.
Ankara opted out of joining international sanctions against Moscow though it has sold deadly drones to Ukraine.
Turkey played a key role in negotiating a prisoner exchange in September between Russia and Ukraine alongside an agreement letting blocked grain exports from the Black Sea.
On two occasions it also brought together Russian and Ukrainian representatives on its soil for negotiations in March
These failed nevertheless with both sides blaming one another.
Street graffiti depicting a Ukrainian soldier firing an antitank missile in Kyiv
Russianinstalled Kherson authorities create local militia
Moscowbacked authorities in Ukraines Kherson region said on Monday they were organising some local men into militias.
In a Telegram post occupation officials said men could join territorial defence units if they chose to remain in the southern city of their own free will.
However men in other occupied Ukrainian regions such as Donetsk have previously been compelled to join up and fight with the armies of Russias proxies in the war with Ukraine.
Putin last week declared martial law in the occupied regions granting their Russianinstalled administrations new powers to step up mobilisation.
Compelling civilians to serve in the armed forces of an occupying power is defined as a breach of the Geneva Convention on the conduct of war.
Russian authorities have ordered civilians to evacuate from Kherson one of four Ukrainian regions Russia said it had annexed last month even as Kyivs forces have made significant military gains.
Russia and its proxies in Kherson have stepped up the urgency of their warnings to leave in the face of Ukraines counteroffensive.
Its vital to save your lives Education Minister Sergei Kravtsov said in a video message on Sunday.
Authorities said at the weekend that around 25000 people had been evacuated since Tuesday mainly by boat across the Dnipro River.
Critics have questioned the extent to which these are genuine evacuations with some pointing out that Ukrainian civilians often have no choice but to flee to Russiancontrolled territory.
Russian TV presenter sacked for saying Ukrainian children should be burned
A Russian TV presenter was dismissed on Monday after calling for Ukrainian children to be burnt.
Anton Krassovski who presents the Russia Today television channel in Russia said children who considered Russia an occupier during the days of the USSR should be thrown into a river with a strong current such as the Tysyna or burnt in a hut.
The 47yearold was responding to an anecdote from a guest who told him about his trip to Ukraine during the Soviet era where he witnessed the feelings of young Ukrainians suffering from the Russian occupation.
The boss of RT in Russia Margarita Simonian quickly condemned these comments overnight from Sunday to Monday deeming them savage and disgusting.
For now Im stopping our collaboration she said in a statement on Telegram.
On Monday morning Simonian said she wanted to warn those who call for atrocities
There is no need to do that she added.
Krassovski apologised for his comments on social media saying he was really embarrassed.
He continued: I apologise to all those who were stunned by this and who found his words wild unthinkable.
The Russian Investigative Committee in charge of the main investigations in the country said Monday that it had demanded a report on this incident following a report from a viewer.
The head of Ukrainian diplomacy Dmytro Kouleba said on Twitter that RT should be banned across the world describing Krassovskis comments as aggressive incitement to genocide (...) which has nothing to do with freedom of expression.
This is not the first time that Krassovski has verbally attacked Ukrainians since the start of the Russian offensive in February.
At the end of March he said in a video on Youtube that he wanted to destroy their Constitution also ensuring that Ukraine should not exist.
labor agency is warning that job vacancies and employment growth are expected to decline worldwide in the fourth quarter
GENEVA  The U.N
ILO noted a rebound in global hours worked at the beginning of the year particularly among women and workers in highskill jobs as the world economy recovered from punishment during the coronavirus pandemic.
US president Joe Biden and his Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelensky have spoken on phone regularly since Russias invasion of Ukraine
But a phone call between the two leaders in June played out differently a report claimed as Joe Biden lost his temper when Zelensky asked for more aid.
Read more: Ukraine says targeted by more than 50 missiles from Russia
The American people were being quite generous and the US military were working hard to help Ukraine Joe Biden told Zelensky raising his voice NBC reported.
Joe Biden told Zelensky that the latter could show a little more gratitude the report further said.
The report comes at a time when Joe Biden faces resistance from some Republicans and Democrats with respect to providing aid to Ukraine as he seeks another package for the warravaged country.
Following the June phone call Zelenskys team tried to defuse tensions with Joe Biden and the Ukraine president publicly thanked Joe Biden for the promised aid.
Read more: Power cuts in hundreds of settlements in 7 regions after Russia strikes: Kyiv
President Biden today
I am grateful for this support
It is especially important for our defense in Donbas Zelensky had then said.
A team of Ukrainian soldiers arms a drone with bombs to attack a Russian personnel carrier in the countrys Kherson region of Ukraine October 28 2022
Serhiy a Ukrainian drone pilot who watched as his weapon buzzed into a Russiancontrolled village and picked off the armored vehicle a blast that was audible seconds later at his position about 4 miles away.
Sign up for The Morning newsletter from the New York Times
The war in Ukraine has been fought primarily through the air with artillery rockets missiles and drones
And for months Russia had the upper hand able to lob munitions at Ukrainian cities towns and military targets from positions well beyond the reach of Ukrainian weapons.
But in recent months the tide has turned along the front lines in southern Ukraine
With powerful Western weapons and deadly homemade drones Ukraine now has artillery superiority in the area commanders and military analysts say.
Ukrainian soldiers are taking out armored vehicles worth millions of dollars with cheap homemade drones as well as with more advanced drones and other weapons provided by the United States and allies.
The Russian military remains a formidable force with cruise missiles a sizable army and millions of rounds of artillery shells albeit imprecise ones
It has just completed a mobilization effort that will add 300000 troops to the battlefield Russian commanders say although many of those will be illtrained and illequipped
And President Vladimir Putin has made clear his determination to win the war at almost any cost.
Still there is no mistaking the shifting fortunes on the southern front.
The contrast with the battlefield over the summer could not be starker
In the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine Russia fired roughly 10 artillery rounds for each answering shell from Ukrainian batteries
Falling rates of Russian fire also speak to ammunition shortages he said
A main highway approaching Kherson city from the west has become a thoroughfare for Ukrainian artillery with towed howitzers truckmounted howitzers and trucks laden with Grad rockets rumbling by continually through the day.
U.S.provided M777 howitzers firing precisionguided shells and striking up to 20 miles behind Russian lines have forced the Russians to stage heavy equipment farther from the front
Ukrainian drones spot infantry but fewer tanks or armored vehicles near the front line said 1st Lt
Oleh the commander of a unit flying reconnaissance drones
And Ukrainian commanders and officials have been dropping hints of an impending attack since the spring only to have the fighting drag on.
But the city lies on the west bank of the Dnieper River making its defenders reliant on bridges to Russian territory on the eastern bank that now lie within easy range of Ukrainian rocket artillery and for the most part are now unusable
That has made the Russian grip precarious
The question remains just how long the Russian forces can or will hold out in Kherson.
After a recent Ukrainian assault using American M777 howitzers and High Mobility Artillery Rockets Slovak Zuzana selfpropelled artillery and Polish Krab selfpropelled artillery Muzyka said citing Ukrainian military sources heavily battered Russian artillery positions on one section of the Kherson front went silent for more than 48 hours.
In the rear storage area sat a highend commercially available drone.
From a rooftop position two former computer programmers turned tank hunters directed drone strikes that took out two Russian armored vehicles in the space of about three hours destroying more than $1 million of Russian weaponry with a weapon that cost about $20000.
After each flight the drone buzzed back a few minutes later unscathed.
This drone system called Perun one of dozens used by the Ukrainian military swoops in at an altitude of about 500 feet hovers directly over a target and releases its bombs.
It cannot be flown in all weather and sometimes misses
Farther from the front line out of drone range U.S.provided satelliteguided artillery shells have forced the Russian military to carefully camouflage or pull back heavy equipment said Oleh the commander of a drone surveillance unit.
The inside was crammed with screens laptops cables and batteries
A strip of flypaper dangled from the ceiling.
Sitting in front of his screens he pinpoints tanks barracks or other military objects and relays coordinates to artillery teams firing satelliteguided shells which hit within a yard or two of their intended targets.
While the messaging and movement of forces around Kherson on both sides have been hard to decipher by design there is no mistaking which side has the momentum.
They also discussed the need for Beijing and Washington to keep open lines of communications and held talks about the war in Ukraine the US State Department said.
China has steadfastly avoided criticizing Russia for invading Ukraine and instead blames the United States and NATO for the war.
The call comes as relations between the two superpowers nosedive over Taiwan and a litany of other issues and is the first between the diplomats since Blinken warned China was speeding up its plans to retake the democratic selfruled island.
ArrowRight Rain and snow will muddy the battlefield rendering heavy military vehicles and equipment functionally immovable
Many Ukrainians anticipate Russia will attack civilian infrastructure that supplies heat and electricity to major cities just in time for the frost.
In a few short weeks for almost everybody with a stake in the fight life is about to get much more difficult
The seasonal shift approaches as emboldened Ukrainian forces rack up significant wins ejecting Russian units from occupied territory in the east south and north
In September they reclaimed ground in the Kharkiv region
Russian President Vladimir Putin has responded by ordering the mobilization of up to 300000 military reservists declaring an annexation of occupied territory and threatening to use nuclear weapons to achieve his aims
The question now: How much can Ukraine accomplish with this burst of momentum using the types of arms and equipment it has and knows how to use when the window for introducing new and potentially gamechanging weapons onto the battlefield is probably closed until the spring?
In detailing the additional artillery ammunition and mineresistant vehicles being rushed to the war zone U.S
NATO defense ministers who have committed to designing a longterm strategy for arming Ukraine are set to meet in Brussels next week.
Fighters on both sides of the conflict are familiar with operating in winter
The opening weeks of the war for instance were so cold that underequipped Russian troops suffered frostbite which slowed but failed to stop the invasion
Another concern for Ukrainian commanders is the risk that certain weapons will become degraded by the harsh weather
And operating such equipment in the cold will require more energy with snow accumulation only complicating the transport of fuel and parts.
Ruben Gallego (DAriz.) a U.S
Marine Corps veteran who served in a coldweather mountain unit
Fuel demands he said will skyrocket
The looming cold presents both armies with a strategic dilemma experts say: By sticking close together and sharing resources it is possible for military units to minimize demand on supply lines
The problem they say is that doing so increases vulnerability to attack.
officials and others who have closely tracked the war say that Russian supply lines already have proved weak and that its military difficulties will only worsen once the 300000 conscripts and reservists are thrown into the mix
According to Pentagon officials it is not possible for Russia to adequately scale up its logistical operations before winter hits.
Dave Butler a spokesman for the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Throughout the war Ukrainian personnel have relied on such help
Sometimes civilians help sustain soldiers with food and fuel
Other times they might provide shelter or a vehicle
What remains to be seen is how well Ukrainian civilians will be positioned this winter to continue serving as a backstop.
government officials and lawmakers for more security aid.
officials appear to share such concerns
Zelensky and his aides have zeroed in on two: tanks particularly the Germanmade Leopard and aircraft which they say will enable Ukrainian forces to better protect their territory.
In the West skepticism remains about supplying Ukraine with moreadvanced systems in the short term.
Laura Cooper a senior Pentagon official told reporters Tuesday that the United States agrees Ukraine needs more tanks but that Soviet systems are probably best as its military already knows how to operate them
officials have warned that new weapons including tanks and aircraft require significant training and present additional maintenance and resupply demands that Ukraine may not yet be equipped to handle.
defense official who like others spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss military contributions to Ukraine.
She said she has fought in battle from the back of a pickup truck because there were not enough armored vehicles
Gurgen (Guga) Gagnidze a 40yearold soldier from Georgia was killed in action near the Ukrainian city of Bakhmut.
Source: European Pravda citing NewsGeorgia
Details: Gagnidze was part of the unit that was ambushed by mercenaries of the Wagner private military company.
photo: Social media
Gagnidze was 40 years old and was serving in the 25th Airborne Brigade of the Armed Forces of Ukraine
A funeral for Mikhail Kaplanishvili who voluntarily joined the Ukrainian Armed Forces and was killed in Luhansk Oblast was held in Georgia several days ago.
Journalists fight on their own frontline
Support Ukrainska Pravda or become our patron!
Step by step we are liberating Ukrainian land
Now Donbas Kharkiv region and Kherson region are in the news
Russian potential is being wasted on a war against our country and the entire free world
He added that this is a very important change in the configuration in this part of Eurasia: the more of its potential Russia loses now the more real freedom will be gained by all peoples both around Russia and within its borders
Ukraine will be the first.
The realization of failure is getting stronger in Russia but keeping this in mind we have no right to relax
We still have to walk the path to Ukrainian victory
As reported on February 24 Russia began a new stage of its war on Ukraine that had been launched in 2014 a fullscale invasion.
DANIIL AVDIEIENKO 7 who several months after being struck by shrapnel while running for safety in Ukraine is still healing from his wounds and grappling with the psychological trauma of the attack.
[1-3] German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen stand ahead of a conference on postwar reconstruction of Ukraine in Berlin Germany October 25 2022
This is not a regular donor conference German Chancellor Olaf Scholz told the conference in Berlin
It is something more profound..
A new Marshall Plan for the 21st century he said comparing the challenge to the U.S
funding of Europes reconstruction after World War Two.
Addressing the conference by video link Zelenskiy said Russian missiles and Iranianmade drones had destroyed more than a third of the countrys energy infrastructure making it vulnerable in the short term and delaying European integration.
It destroys everything to make it harder for us to survive this winter he said
So that you cannot integrate the Ukrainian economic potential for as long as possible.
The conference hosted by Scholz and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen is intended to decide how to proceed with Ukraines reconstruction after the war now in its ninth month.
Ukraine says that repairing the damage caused by a war that has cost thousands of lives and destroyed homes hospitals schools and factories will cost $750 billion
The World Bank estimates reconstruction costs at $349 billion.
Gathering national leaders company chiefs and development experts Tuesdays conference is intended to draw lessons from the failures of previous postwar reconstructions.
Zelenskiy said it was in Europes interest to help Ukraine recover from a war condemned by Western countries as President Vladimir Putins imperialist landgrab but styled by Moscow as a special military operation to purge its neighbour of extremists.
All of you surely know what we have to offer he said
It is Ukraine that can guarantee that Russian revanchism cannot break our European home.
In a nod to concerns widely shared but rarely voiced in European capitals that reconstruction aid could be stolen or wasted he stressed that threequarters of the members of a reconstruction funds advisory board would be from donor countries.
We have no time to waste: the scale of the destruction is staggering said von der Leyen.
Reporting by Thomas Escritt Editing by Mark Potter and Philippa Fletcher
Western countries have already sent Ukraine billions in weapons and other aid
They also have to think about helping rebuild the country once the war is over.
It isnt easy to estimate the cost of rebuilding postwar Ukraine
Denys Shmyhal Ukraines prime minister said in July it would cost $750 billion
The World Bank and European Commission lowered that figure to $349 billion in September
With the war still raging and no end in sight neither estimate is all that reliable.
Russias invasion has destroyed many as 130000 buildings 2400 schools and 400 commercial properties according to Ukraines economy ministry
Then there is road and rail infrastructure to take into account
Russian forces have also been targeting gas and water utilities more specifically in the last few weeks.
Marshall Plan for Ukraine
All of that comes to onethird of Ukraines infrastructure Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said via video link at a twoday conference in Berlin earlier this week
Germany which currently chairs the G7 a collection of the worlds richest democracies hosted the event which also included the European Commission and German business groups.
Prompt repairs in Kyiv draw mixed reactions To view this video please enable JavaScript and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video
Chancellor Olaf Scholz defined the gathering not as a donor conference but rather as an opportunity to create an institutional framework thats necessary to rebuild Ukraine.
Scholz and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen framed Ukraines reconstruction in thecontext of the legendary American Marshall Plan which was a massive financing program in the years immediately following the Second World War to rebuild western Europe solidify American strategic interests and hold back Soviet influence.
It is also a boon for the European Union Scholz noted given Ukraines recent application to join the bloc
Reconstruction would therefore ensure that Ukraine as a future member would have compatible and interoperable logistics transport and infrastructure with the rest of the single market.
Russia has been targetting Ukrainian infrastructure Image: EPAEFE-TELEGRAM-V ZELENSKIY OFFICIAL HA
Wartime present vs
Of course these goals are still a long way away
Economic output is down 30% Ukraines Economy Minister Yulia Svyrydenko told the conference via video from Kyiv
Inflation is at 26% and onethird of the country is out of work.
Still production in Ukraine is ongoing even if curtailed
Despite airraid warnings and other warrelated interruptions Michael Kraus materials company is one of many that keeps operating its facilities in western Ukraine
More recent Russian attacks on infrastructure have made the German companys management once again very pensive he said.
When drones and grenades go off near the factory it is a dramatic escalation Kraus said.
The Ukrainian government needs at least $3 billion every month to keep covering costs like pensions according to international estimates
Even with a recent decision to sell hundreds of publicly owned companies Ukraine has trouble making ends meet
The country faces a deficit of around $38 billion.
Ukrainian munitions depots and residential buildings have been struck by Russian rockets in the Mikolayiv region Image: Operational Command South-AP-dpa-picture alliance
The EU is sending $1.5 billion every month von der Leyen said with the expectation that the US and International Monetary Fund lend a similar hand
In all western countries have spent about $93 billion so far on Ukraine with no end to the war in sight.
Aside from the war one of the biggest obstacles to deeper western economic cooperation remains corruption and lack of transparency in Ukraine
Ukrainian officials say assuaging their partners concerns about how money gets spent and resources used is a top priority.
Weeding out corruption and aligning its practices and oversight capabilities with western expectations are an integral part of Ukraines EU membership hopes
At the Berlin conference Ukraines leadership said they are undertaking that task even as Russian bombs keep falling on their cities.
While youre here: Every Tuesday DW editors round up what is happening in German politics and society
You can sign up here for the weekly email newsletter Berlin Briefing.
You already have an account on ft.com using the same email address.
Ukrainian refugees are being urged not to return home this winter as the country battles to conserve power.
Russian strikes have been targeting Ukraines energy infrastructure in recent weeks.
Ukraines president Volodymyr Zelenskyy says 30% of Ukraines power plants have been destroyed since the war began.
Rolling power cuts  for around four hours a day  have been imposed in parts of the country in a bid to conserve energy.
The threat of shelling cold and hunger remains.
The UNs refugee agency says 7.7 million people have left Ukraine since the outbreak of war in February although some have since returned.
Meanwhile the International Organization for Migration (IOM) says 6.2 million Ukrainians have been displaced within the country.
Around a sixth are currently in urgent need of help according to Stephane Dujarric a UN spokesperson.
Beethoven was claimed by both the Allied and Axis powers
There are few who understand what Ukraine gave us in the last century
Our country was the safe harbor for many who escaped the pogroms that surely would have killed them
And who were some of their children their American children? Bernard Herrmann Alex North Elmer Bernstein Alfred Newman Leonard Bernstein and George Gershwin.
Social Democrat caucus leader Rolf Muetzenich caused a stir at the weekend when he pointed in an interview to opinion polls showing many Germans wanted to see diplomacy aimed at ending the war begun when Russian invaded Ukraine in February.
Reporting by Thomas Escritt Editing by Miranda Muray
The Russian invasion of Ukraine that began on Feb
24 continues with casualties rising on both sides.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has announced Russias annexation of four partially occupied Ukrainian regions following referendums that Western nations called a sham.
Meanwhile Ukrainian forces are mounting a strong counteroffensive against Russian troops reclaiming territory lost when Moscow launched its invasion
Ukraine has managed to withstand the Russian onslaught with the help of Western military aid but President Volodymyr Zelenskyy regularly calls on the world to do more
For all our coverage visit our Ukraine war page.
Read our indepth coverage:
Ukraine war thwarts last APEC communique before leaders summit
weapons stockpiles depleted by Ukraine war
Yuan becomes 5th most traded currency helped by sanctioned Russia
Germany aims to phase out all Russian gas: finance minister
Asian American reporters warn against kamikaze drone in news stories
Note: Nikkei Asia decided on March 5 to suspend its reporting from Russia until further information becomes available regarding the scope of the revised criminal code
Entries include material from wire services and other sources.
Here are the latest developments:
Pakistan approves a plan to buy 300000 tonnes of wheat from Russia the Finance Ministry in Islamabad says
The wheat is priced at $372 per tonne and will be shipped between Nov
Turkey urges Russia to reevaluate its decision to suspend participation in the Black Sea grain export deal.
Russias decision to suspend the grain shipment initiative which is a purely humanitarian activity that should be separated from conflict conditions should be reconsidered Turkish Defense Minister Hulusi Akar has told Russian counterpart Sergei Shoigu according to a National Defense Ministry statement.
Ukraines foreign minister has extended his condolences to India after a weekend bridge collapse that killed more than 130 people in the Indian state of Gujarat
Earlier Dmytro Kuleba expressed his sympathy for Koreans after the deadly crush during Halloween festivities in Seoul.
The Japanese government has decided to remain involved in the formerly Exxonled Sakhalin1 oil and gas project in Russia as it seeks a stable supply of energy despite international sanctions on Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine.
ExxonMobil which held a 30% stake in Sakhalin1 announced in March that it would withdraw from the project.
Russia has set up a new company to take over the project under a presidential decree that has in effect forced investors to choose sides
Russia says it would be risky for Ukraine to continue exporting grain via the Black Sea now that Moscow has suspended participation in a U.N.brokered deal to facilitate shipments.
In conditions when Russia is talking about the impossibility of guaranteeing the safety of shipping in these areas such a deal is hardly feasible and it takes on a different character  much more risky dangerous and unguaranteed Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov tells reporters.
Twelve vessels set off from Ukrainian ports on Monday carrying the highest volume of agricultural products under the deal Kyiv says.
Firefighters work to put out a fire in a residential building destroyed by a Russian drone strike in Kyiv Ukraine on Oct
Russia has stepped up missile attacks on Ukraine in recent weeks after blaming Kyiv for the explosion that damaged the Crimea bridge
Smoke could be seen rising above Kyiv after more than 10 explosions witnesses said and electric power as well as mobile phone networks went down in parts of the city.
Secretary of State Antony Blinken spoke with Chinas Foreign Minister Wang Yi in a call on Sunday and discussed Russias war against Ukraine and the threats it poses to global security and economic stability the U.S
Department of State says in a statement
Blinken also talked with his Chinese counterpart about the need to maintain open lines of communication and responsibly manage U.S.China relations the statement says.
The United Nations Turkey and Ukraine agreed Sunday on a plan for the movement of 16 vessels in Turkish waters on Monday
The agreement came a day after Russia suspended its participation in the Black Sea Grain Initiative which allowed food exports from Ukrainian ports.
The three delegations also agreed for inspections to be provided on Monday to 40 outbound vessels says the Joint Coordination Center in Istanbul where Russian Ukrainian Turkish and U.N
personnel are working
JCC says the Russian delegation was informed of both plans.
A cargo ship carrying grain at the port of Odesa in Ukraine
Moscow suspended a U.N
deal to export food after claiming Ukrainian forces attacked its ships guarding grain shipments
SecretaryGeneral Antonio Guterres delays his travel to Algiers for the Arab League Summit by a day hoping to reverse Russias suspension of participation in the Ukraine Black Sea grain deal
NATO also urges Moscow to renew the U.N.brokered deal amid a global food crisis.
[Russian] President [Vladimir] Putin must stop weaponizing food and end his illegal war on Ukraine NATO spokesperson Oana Lungescu says
Russia halted participation after what it said was a major Ukrainian drone attack on its fleet in Crimea.
Russia suspends participation in a U.N.brokered deal to export agricultural produce from Ukrainian ports following attacks on ships in Crimea Tass quotes the Defense Ministry as saying.
Moscow says Ukrainian forces with the help of drones attacked ships from the Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol in the early hours of Saturday.
Taking into account.
the terrorist act by the Kyiv regime with the participation of British experts against the ships of the Black Sea Fleet and civilian vessels involved in ensuring the security of the grain corridor the Russian side suspends participation in the implementation of agreements on the export of agricultural products from Ukrainian ports the ministry says in a statement.
The United Nations says it was in contact with Russian officials over the announcement.
It is vital that all parties refrain from any action that would imperil the Black Sea Grain Initiative which is a critical humanitarian effort that is clearly having a positive impact on access to food for millions of people around the world U.N
spokesman Stephane Dujarric says.
Elon Musks takeover of Twitter raises skepticism among Ukraines leadership with presidential aide Mykhailo Podolyak pointing to the Tesla bosss unusual moderation of the site in a tweet.
Musk tweeted on Friday that Twitter would form a content moderation council with widely diverse viewpoints. Musk a selfdeclared free speech absolutist has expressed desire to shake up Twitters content moderation and tweeted that the bird is freed after completing the purchase.
On Saturday Podolyak also tweets Did the bird really get its freedom or has it just moved to a new cage?
Musks relations with Kyiv have been precarious since the billionaire suggested in early October Ukraine should give up occupied land for peace.
Russia is prepared to supply up to 500000 tonnes of grain to poor countries in the next four months with assistance from Turkey Tass news agency reports citing Agriculture Minister Dmitry Patrushev.
Russia claims British navy personnel blew up the Nord Stream gas pipelines last month an assertion London says is false and designed to distract from Russian military failures in the war.
Russia did not give evidence for its claim that a leading NATO member had sabotaged critical Russian infrastructure
According to available information representatives of this unit of the British Navy took part in the planning provision and implementation of a terrorist attack in the Baltic Sea on Sept
26 this year  blowing up the Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 gas pipelines the Russian Defense Ministry says.
Britain rejects the claim.
To detract from their disastrous handling of the illegal invasion of Ukraine the Russian Ministry of Defense is resorting to peddling false claims of an epic scale the British Defense Ministry responds.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy expresses skepticism that Russias partial mobilization has truly finished.
We feel completely different on the front line he says in a video address
Although Russia is trying to increase the pressure on our positions by using mobilized people they are so poorly prepared and equipped so ruthlessly used by the command that it allows us to suggest that Russia may soon need a new wave of sending people to war.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy tweets his thanks to Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau for announcing special savings bonds and other aid
Canada is the first country in the world outside of Ukraine to offer a bond for purchase in support of Ukraine Trudeaus office says.
The new measures also include sanctions on 35 senior officials of energy entities including Gazprom and subsidiaries.
A partial mobilization of Russians for military service has been completed Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu tells President Vladimir Putin in a televised meeting.
Shoigu says 82000 reservists have been trained and sent to the area of the special military operation. Another 218000 are in training he says.
The target you set  300000 people  has been achieved Shoigu says in a Kremlin transcript
No additional objectives are planned.
The partial mobilization began in September
It sparked fear among Russians over possible conscription sending some fleeing to Kazakhstan and other countries.
Any use of nuclear weapons by Russia in its invasion of Ukraine must not be tolerated Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida tells Indonesian President Joko Jokowi Widodo in a phone call.
The call comes ahead of next months Group of 20 summit which Indonesia will host.
Democracies should use their advantage in technology to tighten the screws on Vladimir Putins Russia Lithuanias prime minister says.
What our countries need to do is to look at whether there are any loopholes or still gaps where Russia is able to receive technologies for production for refilling their stock of weapons Ingrida Simonyte tells Nikkei in an interview in which she also discusses her countrys relations with Taiwan
Finland and Sweden are committed to joining the NATO military alliance simultaneously the countries prime ministers say.
The Nordic countries launched bids to join NATO in May in response to Russias invasion of Ukraine but ran into objections from Turkey which accuses the two of harboring what it says are militants from the banned Kurdistan Workers Party and other groups.
All NATO members except Turkey and Hungary have ratified the applications.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has defended Moscows attempted annexation of four Ukrainian regions and said the eastern Donbas area would not have survived on its own had Russia not intervened militarily in Ukraine
Putin last month announced that Russia was formally incorporating four regions of eastern and southern Ukraine after staging what he called referendums in Ukraines Donetsk Luhansk Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions
Kyiv and the West have said they will not recognize the attempted annexation which they have cast as part of an illegal Russian land grab.
nuclear chief says he is sending inspectors to two locations in Ukraine where Russia alleged that activities related to the possible production of dirty bombs were taking place and expects them to reach a conclusion in days  very fast. Rafael Grossi said inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency would be traveling this week to the two sites which are under IAEA safeguards following a written request from the Ukrainian government.
South Korean President Yoon Sukyeol said on Friday that Seoul has not provided any lethal weapons to Ukraine after Russian President Vladimir Putin said such a decision would destroy their bilateral relations
Putin made the remark at a conference in Moscow on Thursday accusing the West of inciting the war in Ukraine
We have been in solidarity with the international community for peaceful humanitarian aid to Ukraine and have not provided any lethal weapons but thats in any regard a matter of our sovereignty Yoon told reporters when asked about Putins remark.
In his latest indictment of the Westernled international order and its values Russian President Vladimir Putin blames the West for the conflict over Ukraine.
Power over the world is what the socalled West has put on the line in its game  but the game is dangerous bloody and I would say dirty Putin said in a speech to the Valdai Discussion Club in Moscow.
I have always believed and believe in common sense so I am convinced that sooner or later the new centers of the multipolar world order and the West will have to start an equal conversation about the future we share  and the earlier the better Putin also said
The Biden administrations first Nuclear Posture Review warns Moscow could use its nuclear forces to try to win a war on its periphery or avoid defeat if it was in danger of losing a conventional war.
Pointing to Russian aggression against its neighbors the report says that as long as nuclear weapons exist NATO will remain a nuclear alliance. Read more.
Chinas yuan has jumped to fifth place in currency transactions new data shows as the countrys economic expansion increases trade and sanctionshit Russia turns to the Chinese market.
Chinas growing transactions with Russia are believed to be behind the shift
Russia accounted for 3.58% of offshore yuan payments in September  the fourthhighest figure  according to SWIFT the global payments messaging system
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov welcomes Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi during a 2019 meeting in Sochi
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has spoken with Chinese counterpart Wang Yi by phone congratulating him on his promotion to the Politburo of Chinas Communist Party the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs says in a readout on their call.
Lavrov thanked the Chinese side for supporting Russias position in favor of a fair settlement of the situation around Ukraine according to the ministry.
A readout from the Chinese side says the two ministers exchanged views on Ukraine and international and regional issues of common concern without elaborating.
China will firmly support Russia under the leadership of President Putin to unite and lead the Russian people to overcome difficulties eliminate disturbances realize the strategic goals of development and further establish Russias status as a major power on the international stage the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs says in the readout.
This view of the damage at the Tets5 power station in Kyiv Ukraine on Oct
12 came from a satellite image provided by 2022 Maxar Technologies
Ukraine has boosted its forces in the northern region near Belarus to counter any possible renewed Russian attack across the border Ukraines General Staff says
At the current time the creation of a strike force (in Belarus) is not observable
(But) there are and will be threats
We are reacting we have already increased our troops in the northern direction Oleksii Hromov deputy head of the General Staffs Main Operations Directorate told a regular briefing.
A senior Russian foreign ministry official says commercial satellites from the United States and its allies could become legitimate targets for Russia if they are involved in the war in Ukraine
Quasicivilian infrastructure may be a legitimate target for a retaliatory strike Konstantin Vorontsov deputy director of the foreign ministrys department for nonproliferation and arms control was quoted as saying by Tass
We are talking about the involvement of components of civilian space infrastructure including commercial by the United States and its allies in armed conflicts.
A drone fired on this building in Kyiv Ukraine on Oct
and its Western allies on the United Nations Security Council insisted that SecretaryGeneral Antonio Guterres has the right to investigate if Russia has used Iranian drones to attack civilians and power plants in Ukraine
They dismissed Moscows argument that the U.N
chief would be violating the U.N
ambassador Vassily Nebenzia who called the council meeting argued that only the Security Council can mandate an investigation
deputy ambassador Robert Wood called Russias contention simply dumbfounding and an attempt to deflect attention from its own egregious wrongdoing in Ukraine.
imposes sanctions on individuals and entities involved in what it described as Russias malign influence operations in Moldova as well as systemic corruption in the small Eastern European country.
The individuals sanctioned a mix of Russian and Moldovan officials include oligarchs widely recognized for capturing and corrupting Moldovas political and economic institutions and those acting as instruments of Russias global influence campaign the U.S
Treasury Department says in a statement.
Ford Motor says it will exit Russia having finalized a deal to sell its 49% stake in the Russiabased Sollers Ford joint venture for a nominal undisclosed price.
MercedesBenz also says it will withdraw from the Russian market and sell shares in its industrial and financial services subsidiaries to a local investor.
Russias Yars intercontinental ballistic missile is launched during exercises at the Plesetsk Cosmodrome Russia in footage released on Oct
Russia has tested ballistic and cruise missiles during exercises involving its nuclear forces the Kremlin says.
A training session was held for ground sea and air strategic deterrence forces under the leadership of President Vladimir Putin the countrys military commander in chief according to a Kremlin news release.
One of the ballistic missiles was launched from Kamchatka in the Russian Far East
All of the tasks were completed and the missiles reached their targets the Kremlin says.
officials had said that Washington was notified of the Russian nuclear drills and that the White House had not assessed that Russia was preparing to use a nuclear weapon.
Germany will seek a complete halt to energy imports from Russia as soon as possible the countrys finance minister Christian Lindner tells Nikkei.
Linder vows to phase out Russian gas and to become completely independent of Russia as quickly as possible. Listing energy procurement alternatives such as using floating terminals to stockpile liquefied natural gas (LNG) and using more renewable energy he says adding That is a clear indication to Russia that were not going to be pressured. Read more.
Russia has given the U.S
notice of planned exercises of nuclear forces  drills expected to include test launching ballistic missiles.
was notified and as weve highlighted before this is a routine annual exercise by Russia said Pentagon spokesman Patrick Ryder an Air Force brigadier general in a news briefing
And so in this regard Russia is complying with its arms control obligations and its transparency commitments ..
to make those notifications.
Zara owner Inditex has announced an initial agreement to sell its Russian business to the United Arab Emiratesbased Daher group which has interests in retailing and real estate.
The Spanish apparel group had paused Russian sales in March
It explicitly leaves the door open for returning in the future under a franchise agreement with Daher.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has congratulated new U.K
Prime Minister Rishi Sunak on taking office.
I wish you to successfully overcome all the challenges facing British society and the whole world today Zelenskyy says in a Twitter post.
Zelenskyy had a cordial relationship with former U.K
leader Boris Johnson who put Ukraine at the top of his foreignpolicy agenda and visited the country multiple times after Russias invasion
Johnsons successor Liz Truss pledged continued support for Kyiv but resigned after just six weeks in office.
For earlier updates click here.
You already have an account on ft.com using the same email address.
Auckland woman Antonina Ovchinnikova has raised tens of thousands of dollars for volunteer units in the Russian military which has illegally invaded Ukraine
From a quiet suburb half a world away from the war a Russian Kiwi has raised tens of thousands of dollars for Russian soldiers who are illegally invading Ukraine.
Since May Ovchinnikova has also asked her 23000 followers to donate money for the purchase of specific gear for volunteer Russian army units that are in Ukraine.
Russia which began its invasion of Ukraine in February has fired missiles into apartment buildings committed a massacre in the town of Bucha and illegally annexed Ukrainian land.
* West says there are no biological weapons in Ukraine Russia disagrees
* Russian troops steal remains of Catherine the Greats lover from Kherson grave
Ovchinnikova who has lived in New Zealand for 10 years has now raised 1.5 million Russian rubles (about NZ$43000) and bought gun sights machine gun mufflers and even drones for the soldiers.
Abigail Dougherty-Stuff Antonina Ovchinnikova believes New Zealand journalists are hiding the truth of the war and Russia is rightly invading Ukraine.
Stuff has decided to withhold the name of the channel.
Her beliefs are standard Kremlin propaganda espoused by Vladimir Putin himself as a justification for the invasion and have no basis in fact.
Ovchinnikova asks her followers for rubles and for the money to be sent to Russian bank accounts including some held by Sberbank a bank which is the subject of sanctions by New Zealand.
The items are then purchased in Russia and sent to the units on the front line.
Sometimes Ovchinnikova claims she gets discounts from stores in Russia when she says where the items are going.
Stuff has found and translated 20 posts on the channel where she claims to have raised money and purchased items worth a total of just over 1550000 rubles.
Evgeniy Maloletka-AP Ukrainian authorities discovered a mass burial site near the recaptured city of Izium that contained hundreds of graves.
Ovchinnikova even used one post to deride the Kiwi volunteer Dominic Abelen who recently died fighting the Russians in Ukraine.
The woman claims that she is also in contact with soldiers on the front line and when she announces an item that she is collecting money for she claims the soldiers have requested it.
Do you know more? Email james.halpin@stuff.co.nz or SMS - Signal +64 021 224 1061
One video shows a soldier holding unboxed gun sights and thanking the channel specifically for raising the money for the items.
Yuriy Gladun chairman of the northern region of the Ukrainian Association of NZ said he wanted to see New Zealand designate Russia a terrorist state so anyone financing it could be convicted of a crime.
At least for now the tide appears to be turning against Russia in its attack on Ukraine which has recaptured wide swaths of land in recent weeks
The Ukrainian successes have spurred discussion in the West about the prospect for negotiations to end the aggression and at what cost
Putin also said he would defend his country with nuclear weapons if threatened by the West.
Interview has been edited for clarity and length.
SHORT: There are a number of elements which one has to bear in mind
One and the most important is that the war is not going well for the Russians
Putin catastrophically miscalculated on several scores: He did not expect the Ukrainians to resist as strongly as they have done
There was never any question that he thought they were going to be welcomed with flowers
That was the kind of propaganda myth that was put around
And he miscalculated terribly over the capacities of the Russian army and how extremely poorly it has performed in military terms
Is it a disaster? Not yet
One has to be very cautious about evaluating this because it is an ongoing situation
GAZETTE: Should the U.S
and the West take advantage of this moment as it helps Ukraine put maximum pressure on Russia to end the war militarily? Or is that potentially too risky and would it be better to seize this time to stabilize the situation through negotiations?
The more that the Ukrainians can push the Russians back the stronger their negotiating position will be
Eventually all wars end either with complete defeat in other words in a Ukrainian flag flying over the Kremlin and that is not going to happen or with negotiations
Ukraine is not going to physically move anywhere and nor is Russia
They are going to continue to be neighbors and eventually they are going to have to find a way to live together
So negotiations yes.
On this business of pushing Russia back one has to be very careful about or very much aware of Crimea
That I think would be a casus belli
Then kind of all bets would be off about how the Russians might react
GAZETTE: If Putin starts to feel as if he is losing the upper hand in the war or losing face at home are people right to worry how he might react?
It could happen.
There are already fault lines you can see in NATO and the EU about how to react what the longterm plans should be in Ukraine
But the fault lines have been very much kept under control for now
All those things on our side are going to be absolutely critical
On the Russian side I think we are going to need to watch very carefully how public opinion reacts to this partial mobilization
And finally what it all in the end depends on is the situation on the battlefield.
RussiaUkraine war: A weekly recap and look ahead (Sept
As the week begins heres a look ahead and a roundup of key developments from the past week.
What to watch this week
On Monday Brussels hosts a meeting of the EUUkraine Association Council whose agenda includes the European Unions support for Ukraine amid the Russian invasion and Ukraines application for membership in the bloc.
On Tuesday the United Nations Security Council is expected to convene on Russias request to discuss the Russianoccupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station in southern Ukraine following recent attacks outages and an international inspection at the plant.
Also Boris Johnsons tenure as British prime minister comes to an end
He won praise and affection from Ukrainians as a strong supporter of Kyiv.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin is scheduled to visit the Vostok military exercises in eastern Russia.
On Wednesday the U.N
Security Council is due to talk about forced displacement in Ukraine as announced by France.
Ambassador to the U.N
Linda ThomasGreenfield will give a preview of Washingtons priorities at the U.N
General Assembly later this month
On Friday she will address global food security which has also been affected by the war.
Friday EU energy meetings are to hold an extraordinary meeting following price surges largely due to fallout from the war in Ukraine
Additionally EU economy and finance ministers and central bank chiefs will also hold an informal meeting.
On Sunday Russia holds gubernatorial elections in over a dozen regions.
Meanwhile security analysts will watch for developments as Ukraines counteroffensive in the south goes into its second week.
What happened last week
29: Ukraine launched a counteroffensive in southern areas captured by Russian forces early in the war.
30: Former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev died at 91
Putin didnt attend the Sept
3 burial ceremony and the Kremlin gave it only limited elements of a state funeral.
UNESCO said it supports Ukraines bid to list Odesa as a World Heritage site.
31: EU countries agreed to suspend visas for Russians but came short of an outright entry ban.
1: International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors visited the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station in southern Ukraine after a delay and attacks en route to the Russianoccupied plant.
Ukraines new school year began in the middle of a war
While some schools started in person most will try to hold classes online
More than 2000 centers of learning from preschools to universities have been damaged or destroyed the Education Ministry says.
Russia kicked off Vostok 2022 a week of military exercises with other countries
Some analysts say the drills reflect Moscows deepening ties with China and India.
2: President Biden asked Congress to approve $11.7 billion for Ukraine including $7.2 for militaryrelated costs and $4.5 billion for direct economic support.
3: The embattled Zaporizhzhia nuclear station was once again knocked off its last external power line but was still able to run electricity through a reserve line
Russia and Ukraine have blamed each other for shelling in the area.
Russian shelling hit Ukraines Kharkiv in the northeast and Mykolaiv in the south.
4: John Sullivan left his post as U.S
ambassador to Russia and will retire from public service the U.S
Embassy in Moscow said
He was appointed in December 2019 by then President Donald Trump and stayed on through a tumultuous time
Elizabeth Rood becomes the embassys charge daffaires until Sullivans successor arrives.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal visited Germany and spoke with its leaders about the war Russia sanctions and Ukraines weapons needs.
Ukraines southern offensive relies on heavy weapons
Soldiers say there arent enough.
Along the front lines in eastern Ukraine cut off from resources a resilient city holds on.
What its like for Ukrainians working at a nuclear plant under Russian occupation.
As inspectors leave Ukraines nuclear plant the mayor of a nearby town has high hopes.
What inspectors are looking for at Ukraines wardamaged Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant.
A Ukrainian neurologist from Kyiv checks back in with NPR saying dozens of medical professionals from the West have offered help since the first interview.
At Latvias border with Russia the line grows long and tempers short.
Massive military aid package to Ukraine signals U.S
is in war for the long haul.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
Earlier developments
You can read past recaps here
The chaos of the past week might be incorrectly comforting
The referendums are illegal under international law and Ukraine the United States and the rest of NATO have already made it clear this move will have no legal standing and will lead to sanctions.
For months Western officials waved away any suggestions that nuclear conflict was even a consideration
The principles of mutual assured destruction that brought a dark calm to the Cold War seems to have lapsed.
Putin is far weaker now
This is a binary moment for Putin who has no climbdown or gentle offramp available.
Rusty rifles drunken busloads of recruits and still no answer to the key question of how these tens of thousands of untrained and perhaps unwilling soldiers will get supplied and equipped on the frontline if Moscow could not adequately outfit its regular army over the past six months?
The chaos of mobilization already has Kremlin propaganda moguls like Margarita Simonian the head of statecontrolled network RT acting as a Twitter agony aunt for Russians whose fathers sons or husbands have been incorrectly sent to the frontline.
They argue overzealous local officials are to blame for conscription errors but beneath it all it is the war and its appalling prosecution that have led Russia here
All of this leaves Putin far weaker than when he was just losing the war
To add to his woes he now faces internal dissent that is perhaps unprecedented
His position is dependent on strength and he lacks that now almost completely
The forced mobilization of ageing men and unwilling youngsters is unlikely to change the battlefield calculus where Ukrainian morale is skyhigh and their equipment slowly improving.
They are all covered in the same blood of this war and behind the slow drumbeat of repression that has turned Russia into a dystopian autocracy over the past 22 years
Putin has no obvious successor; do not expect anyone who finally replaces him to reverse tack and sue for peace and economic recovery
Any successor may try to prove their mettle with an even more foolhardy exercise than the original invasion of Ukraine.
So we are left with a losing Putin who cannot afford to lose
Without much conventional force left he could turn to other tools to reverse this disastrous position.
Strategic aircraft might carpet bomb parts of Ukraine though so many of its towns and cities look like this has already happened
He might also turn to chemical or biological weapons although these would be too close to his own border for sanity or comfort and would elicit an intense international response
But that too comes with risks for Putin beyond the likely NATO military retaliation
A military that cannot fly enough of its planes or fuel enough of its tanks has problems
It might worry that it will not be able to pull off an accurate limited and effective tactical nuclear strike.
Video Ad Feedback Putin is cornered: ExCIA officer predicts Putins next move 03:01  Source: CNN
Putin himself might worry that his fraying grip on power cannot hold together a chain of command solid enough to actually obey the order to launch a nuclear weapon
This could even be the moment where the better angels of Russian nature come to the fore
In the five years I lived there I met a bright warm and sparkling people blighted mostly by centuries of misrule.
This is a win or lose moment for Putin and he does not see a future in which he loses.
Hein Goemans grew up in Amsterdam in the nineteensixties and seventies surrounded by stories and memories of the Second World War
When Goemans came to the United States to study international relations he recalled being asked in one class about his most formative personal experience of international relations
He said that it was the Second World War
But it was very personal for Goemans
He recalled attending a commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the liberation of Amsterdam by Canadian forces in May of 1985
Many of the Canadian soldiers who took part in the liberation were still alive and they recreated the arrival of Canadian troops to liberate the city
A great deal of work Goemans learned had been done on how wars start but very little on how they might conclude
There were perhaps historical reasons for this oversight: the nuclear armament of the United States and the Soviet Union meant that a war between them could end human civilization; not just some dying but the death of everything
The study of war during the Cold War thus gave rise to a rich vocabulary about deterrence: direct deterrence extended deterrence deterrence by punishment deterrence by denial
But the Cold War ended and wars kept happening
Goemans saw an opportunity for an intellectual intervention.
Traditionally Goemans writes wars were thought to end because one side surrendered
But the empirical record showed this to be at best an incomplete account
But the Germans instead of accepting this kept advancing into Russia
Only after the Bolsheviks agreed to even harsher terms than had been proposed just three weeks earlier did the Germans agree to their exit from the war.
More recent theoretical literature had acknowledged the twosidedness of war Goemans writes but here too important aspects had been missed
The most common cause of the breakdown according to war theorists (and again borrowing from economics) was some form of informational asymmetry
There were many reasons for this sort of informational asymmetry not least of which was that the warfighting capacity of individual nations was almost always a closely guarded secret
In any case the best way to find out who was stronger was to actually start fighting
Then things became clear quite quickly
But there were other kinds of wars in which factors besides information predominated
These factors in part because they did not play prominent roles in economics were less well understood
If a country really wanted to break a deal there was no court of arbitration to which the other party could appeal
Britain was losing the war and had no certainty that the United States would enter in time to save it
But the British fought on because they knew that no deal with Nazi Germany could be trusted
The other factor that had been ignored in the literature according to Goemans was domestic politics
States were considered unitary actors with set interests but this left out the internal pressures placed on the government of a modern nationstate
Goemans created a data set of every leader of every warfighting country between 1816 and 1995 and coded each according to a tripartite system
Some leaders were democrats; some were dictators; and some were in between
According to Goemans democrats tended to respond to the information delivered by the war and act accordingly; at the very worst if they lost the war but their country still existed they would get turned out of office and go on a book tour
Dictators because they had total control of their domestic audience could also end wars when they needed to
After the first Gulf War Saddam Hussein was such a leader; he simply killed anyone who criticized him
The trouble Goemans found lay with the leaders who were neither democrats nor dictators: because they were repressive they often met with bad ends but because they were not repressive enough they had to think about public opinion and whether it was turning on them
I recently spoke to a number of wartermination theorists including Goemans to see what the theoretical perspective could tell us about the war in Ukraine
The theorists turned out to be an engaged and lively group most of them glued to Twitter and Telegram in multiple languages as they tried to follow the war in real time
They believed the wars that they had studied could shed light on the current conflict
Apparently they were not the only ones who thought so
intelligence agency.
There was very little cyber warfare and Russia had used just a few hypersonic missiles
Tanisha Fazal a scholar at the University of Minnesota who is writing a book on battlefield medicine was struck by the low ratio of Russian wounded to killed
The historical ratio in the last hundred and fifty years has been around three or four to one
In recent wars such as in Afghanistan the U.S
had managed to get the woundedtokilled ratio as high as ten to one meaning that fewer soldiers were dying after being wounded
The Russians were estimated to be back down to four to one
The reason Fazal said was that the Russians have not managed to establish air superiority; they cannot get their wounded soldiers out quickly enough and therefore many of them die.
More broadly the war had exhibited many traits that were familiar to theorists of war
Russia claimed that it could not trust Ukraine to not become in essence a NATO state; Ukraine for its part had no reason to trust a Russian regime that had repeatedly broken promises and invaded it in February with no provocation
But the resolution of the crediblecommitment problem was complicated
But not many wars end with such absolute outcomes.
To add to the complications this war like others is dynamic
A great deal has happened since Russia invaded Ukraine on the morning of February 24th
The revelations of Russian weakness and Ukrainian strength have buoyed the Ukrainian public; the discovery of the massacres of civilians at Bucha and now Izyum have enraged it
If once there was space in Ukrainian public opinion for concessions to Russia that space has now closed
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy
The Kremlin repeatedly attempts to delegitimize Ukraine as a nation and state in the eyes of the Ukrainian and Russian publics and international community.
President Putin regularly denies that Ukraine is a true nation
Imperialism Redux and Weaponization of Maps
Russian Historical and Cultural Propaganda Wants to Erase Ukrainian Cultural Identity
Russian bombing has even damaged the memorial at Babyn Yar where 100000 Jewish and other Ukrainians were executed by the Nazis during World War II.
Dehumanizing Rhetoric Plus Denials and Threats
The Puppetry of Annexation
Any claims by the Kremlin that Ukrainian people yearn to be annexed by Russia are simply not true
Opinion polls show an overwhelming consensus among Ukrainians that they oppose Russian aggression
In every Russiacontrolled region there are credible reports of occupation authorities withholding food water and medical aid from Ukrainian civilians until they have accepted Russian passports
State propaganda outlets like Sputnik then depict lines of residents seeking Russian passports as voluntary with residents who offer conveniently proKremlin statements
Yet polling data shows that in a free referendum Ukrainians in the occupied areas would not choose to join Russia
Kremlin state media outlets falsely allege that Ukrainians in the Kharkiv region also seek Russian identities
Kremlin disinformation outlets immediately amplified these false claims
In a survey conducted by the International Republican Institute in April 2022 more than 90 percent of Ukrainians said their opinion of Russia has worsened since the February 24th invasion
Russian officials recognize this reality despite their disinformation and propaganda efforts
intelligence indicates that Russian officials are concerned about low voter turnout in these sham referenda and know their efforts to legitimize the illegal land grab will lack legitimacy and will not reflect the will of the people.
Ukraine Will Remain Sovereign and Independent
Thirtyone years ago the people of Ukraine proclaimed their independence as a sovereign nation
Since 2014 and particularly during the past six months the world has witnessed President Putin using both military force and deceptive statements to undermine Ukrainian sovereignty
He has failed in that goal despite the suffering he has inflicted on Ukraine
It will remain sovereign and independent
Whats next for the war in Ukraine
Nearly seven months of war in Ukraine Kyivs counteroffensive succeeded and Russia ordered more troops to mobilize
Ukrainian lawmakers have been visiting Washington to petition for more arms.
After nearly seven months of war in Ukraine a lot has happened recently
There was Ukraines successful counteroffensive in the east
Then the Kremlin ordered more Russian troops to mobilize and its puppet authorities in Ukraine announced plans that would lead to further annexation of Russian occupied territory
And if all that is not enough Russian President Vladimir Putin is threatening to deploy nuclear weapons
Three members of Ukraines parliament recently met their U.S
congressional counterparts and requested longerrange artillery and tanks
Heres how one of those lawmakers put it through an interpreter.
In order to actually drive Russia out of our territory we do need more weapons.
There were three Ukrainian lawmakers here
I spoke with one of them Roman Kostenko who is also by the way an Army colonel
And again they want American tanks longerrange artillery
Now Ukraine is getting tanks from Poland and a couple of dozen more will be provided by Slovenia
All those are Sovietera tanks but the American tanks have greater firepower and are faster
Thats why they want them
Now with artillery theres a system called HIMARS provided by the U.S
Sixteen of these highly accurate rocket artillery pieces are now in the fight
Now the rounds the U.S
HIMARS is only one of the items on that list
And as we talked with the members of Congress we emphasized that in order to regain our territories that are now under Russian occupation we need more offensive types of weapons
And so we were raising questions about such weapons as tanks aircraft armored vehicles  things we need in order to successfully continue the offensive.
Is the U.S going to keep providing more weapons? Will we provide this additional military aid?
You know its uncertain
Officials fear that providing the longerrange artillery could hit targets deep inside Russia and they dont want to further antagonize Vladimir Putin
And a senior defense official said the U.S
may provide tanks in the future but not for the immediate fight
This official said the Ukrainians are familiar with the Sovietera tanks and would need further training on the American one both how to operate them and maintain them
Now with Russian President Vladimir Putins call to bring up 300000 reservists that may spur even more talk of giving the Ukrainians these more powerful weapons
And the people I talk with Mary Louise say its more likely youll see longer range artillery shells but not the tanks
So well just have to see.
Jason what are you hearing about all this actually inside Ukraine  this need for more weaponry that the Ukrainians are putting out there?
Yeah despite that recent haul of seized Russian weapons from the counteroffensive officials in Kyiv are saying that they really need these modern Western weapons and that they are highly effective  you know particularly as Tom mentioned the longerrange missiles and also equipment for air defense systems
Theres sort of two prongs to this
First they want these better weapons to try to really aggressively push forward with another counteroffensive in the south of the country at a time when Russia is clearly on its back foot
You know this is sort of like Muhammad Ali would come charging out of his corner at this point from a tactical point of view and really try to push back the Russians from the territory that theyve taken here.
The second prong is defensive
Ukrainian officials and you know even local people that I talked to  theyre very concerned that this could turn into a long drawnout conflict
And if that happens they want to be able to protect their cities against Russian rocket attacks
At the moment Russian cruise missiles can still strike anywhere in the country
You know since the invasion all commercial air traffic in Ukraine has been shut down
A better air defense system might allow them to get at least an airport out in Lviv in the west of the country open
And you know youre hardly even seeing any military aircraft in the air here
Ukrainians really would like some international help in regaining control of their airspace.
Before I let you both go Jason respond to something Tom just dropped into the conversation  that Russia may be possibly sending up to 300000 more troops
How is that news being received in Ukraine?
You know I have to say Ukrainians seem remarkably unfazed by Putins latest saberrattling
People are saying that so far theyve dealt with everything Russias been throwing at them
Its been tough but they say that theyre going to deal with whatever comes next.
Accuracy and availability may vary
This pivotal moment could also force a tough decision for Western governments which have up until now offered support to Ukraine at a steadily increasing cost to their own economies and national stockpiles of weapons.
US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin is poised to lead a working group of nearly 50 countries to discuss the crisis on Wednesday when the US expects more announcements of weapons and equipment packages for Ukraine according to a senior US defense official
Three potential outcomes
Western officials are closely watching three possible scenarios that they believe could unfold:
Russia could continue to make incremental gains in two key eastern provinces
Or the battle lines could harden into a stalemate that drags on for months or years leading to tremendous casualties on both sides and a slowrolling crisis that will continue to be a drain on the global economy.
Then there is what officials consider the least likely possibility: Russia could redefine its war aims announce that it has achieved victory and attempt to engineer a close to the fighting
For now that scenario appears to be little more than wishful thinking sources say.
If Russia is able to consolidate some of its gains in the east US officials increasingly fear that Russian President Vladimir Putin may eventually be able to use that territory as a staging ground to push further into Ukraine.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy issues a joint statement with European Commission President Ursula in Kyiv Ukraine June 11 2022
Western officials broadly believe that Russia is in a more favorable position in the east based solely on mass
As the front lines of the conflict have settled into a war of attrition built around backandforth artillery fire both sides have suffered tremendous casualties and now face potential manpower shortfalls
Russia has also suffered losses of as much as a third of its ground force and US intelligence officials have said publicly that Russia will struggle to make any serious gains without a full mobilization a politically dangerous move that Putin has so far been unwilling to make.
For now the fighting is centered on two sister cities on opposite sides of the Seversky Donets River Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk
Ukrainian fighters are almost completely encircled at Sievierodonetsk.
Black smoke and dirt rise from the nearby city of Severodonetsk during battle between Russian and Ukrainian troops in the eastern Ukraine region of Donbas on June 9 2022
A preference for Soviet systems
US officials insist that Western arms are still flowing to the front lines of the fight
Ukraine has begged not only for heavy artillery but also for even more basic supplies like ammunition.
Part of the problem sources say is that even as Ukraine is running out of old Soviet munitions that fit existing systems there have also been obstacles to transitioning its fighters to Western NATOcompliant systems
In some cases according to one source familiar with US intelligence Ukraine is simply opting not to use the unfamiliar Western systems
For example despite receiving hundreds of Switchblade drones some units prefer to use commercial drones rigged with explosives that are more userfriendly.
The Biden administration announced a new aid package earlier this month that included the High Mobility Artillery Rocket System or HiMARS which is capable of launching a barrage of rockets and missiles and which Ukraine had urgently requested for weeks
But although a small group of Ukrainian soldiers began training on the system almost immediately after the package was announced it requires three weeks of training and has not yet entered the fight
Meanwhile there are a limited number of Sovietera munitions still existing elsewhere in the world that can be sent to Ukraine
Their performance under fire is an unknown quantity.
Russian President Vladimir Putin attends a joint press conference with President of Turkmenistan Serdar Berdimuhamedow following their meeting in Moscow Russia June 10 2022
As the fighting has dragged on the cost to Western governments has continued to rise
Then of course there is the sting of high energy prices and high inflation
As those costs begin to impact ordinary citizens in the US and in Europe and as media attention begins to drift from the daytoday grind of the fighting some officials fear Western support for Ukraine may wane.
After a series of sham referendums in four Russianoccupied parts of Ukraine the results are out
Unsurprisingly they show a resounding majority voted to join Russia
The referendums are widely seen as rigged as many irregular voting practices have been reported.
Electoral officials went door to door with portable ballot boxes to collect votes from residents living in the occupied Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions in the south and selfproclaimed proRussian republics in Donetsk and Luhansk with polling stations open only yesterday the last day of voting.
See our blog below for the results.
Its widely expected that Russian President Vladimir Putin will announce Friday that the occupied regions are being annexed and becoming a part of the Russian Federation
There are widespread fears that Moscow could resort to nuclear weapons to defend what it will claim is its territory.
Elsewhere European officials continue to investigate unexplained leaks affecting both the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines that carry natural gas from Russia to Europe via the Baltic Sea.
President Joe Biden approved $1.1 billion more in military aid for Ukraine.
Eastern Ukraine continues to see intense assaults from Russian forces according to the Ukrainian military but the British Defense Ministry has questioned whether Russia has made any significant advances in the last 72 hours.
Russian forces have attacked the westcentral Ukrainian city of Vinnytsia with at least 23 dead and 110 wounded according to latest report from the emergency services on the scene.
In other news talks aimed at freeing up grain exports from Ukraine are set to continue next week following discussions on Wednesday in Istanbul
Russia and Ukraine are slated to meet again in Turkey next week in the hope that a deal can be finalized.
President Volodymyr Zelenskky said Ukraine is doing its best to resume food supplies to the global market
For months Russian warships have blocked Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea preventing vital exports from leaving the country and contributing to a global food price crisis.
The ripple effects of Russias war in Ukraine are changing the world
Far from Russias war in Ukraine stores are running out of cooking oil people are paying more at the gas pump farmers are scrambling to buy fertilizer and nations are rethinking alliances.
Russias invasion of Ukraine has triggered seismic repercussions: a fastmoving refugee crisis unprecedented sanctions against a major economy and a shakeup of global relationships including a reinvigorated NATO
Below we zoom in on some of the ways the world has changed since the war began on Feb
Ukraine and Russia are key exporters of wheat barley corn and cooking oil particularly for African and Middle Eastern countries
Russia is also a major producer of fertilizer and petroleum
Disruptions to the flow of these goods are compounding other supply chain and climate challenges driving up food and gas prices causing shortages and pushing millions of people into hunger.
More than 5.8 million people have fled Ukraine in one of the fastestgrowing refugee crises in recent history
Humanitarian groups with resources already strained by crises elsewhere have sprung into action
refugee agency has projected that some 8.3 million people might leave Ukraine and called for more financial support for refugees and host countries as both face challenges with access to food housing transportation education and money.
It has rattled prominent global players such as the European Union and the United Nations and forced countries to take sides in new ways that have led to escalating tensions and momentous diplomatic shifts.
Russia is the secondlargest producer of natural gas and the thirdlargest producer of oil
The European Union has particularly depended on Russian energy; it is now preparing to phase in an oil embargo
A historic restructuring is sweeping the global petroleum and gas trade as countries ban or cut Russian energy imports sanction Russian companies face Russias demands for payments in rubles and search for alternative sources.
Russia has more nuclear weapons than any other country in the world
Its military attack on Ukraine has notably reenergized NATO a military and political alliance of the United States and European countries
Urgently countries around the world have escalated military spending or have begun a consequential reevaluation of their defenses.
Parvaz Scott Neuman and Larry Kaplow contributed to this report.
Since February 24 2022 Russia has been waging a war of aggression in Ukraine and blatantly attacking civilians and civilian infrastructure
This conflict initiated by an unprovoked Russian invasion has inflicted death and widespread suffering on Ukrainian civilians and military personnel
More than 7.1 million Ukrainians have been displaced within their country and approximately 5.3 million have crossed borders to become refugees in other European countries
In the 1990s the medical and scientific community began honing its capability for assessing and responding to armed conflict.1 Recent wars and brutal conflicts have given rise to important discussions about the epidemiology of warrelated morbidity and mortality civilian suffering health care capacity in the midst of war consequences of abrupt population displacement and parameters of humanitarian response as well as legal and normative debates regarding the human rights and international legal dimensions of armed conflicts.
In Ukraine as in the early stages of other wars inadequate security inaccurate or incomplete reporting nonfunctioning data systems displacement of populations and indirect distant and delayed health effects have made it impossible to gather accurate morbidity and mortality data
Through June 20 the United Nations had confirmed 4569 deaths and 5691 nonfatal injuries among Ukrainian civilians most caused by indiscriminate use of explosive weapons with a wide impact area including shells from heavy artillery missiles and bombs
But the actual numbers of deaths and injuries are probably much higher
For example according to CNN municipal officials in Mariupol believed that by May 25 at least 22000 city residents had been killed.
As in other recent wars the strategy of attacking health care facilities and health workers is now resulting in both immediate deaths and injuries and adverse consequences of reduced availability of health care.2 Between February 24 and June 24 the World Health Organization reported 323 attacks on health care facilities in Ukraine leaving 76 people dead and 59 injured.3
A substantial proportion of civilian morbidity and mortality in Ukraine is undoubtedly attributable to diseases resulting from forced displacement and damage to food and water supply systems health care and public health facilities and other civilian infrastructure.4 Communicable diseases are more easily transmitted because of crowded living conditions decreased access to safe water and food compromised sanitation and hygiene inadequate medical care and lapses in immunization campaigns
During war civilians are at especially increased risk for diarrheal diseases such as cholera and respiratory disorders such as measles Covid19 and tuberculosis
In addition antimicrobial resistance often increases during war.
As a deliberate war strategy Russian military forces have disrupted agriculture damaged food storage and distribution systems and restricted access to food
Indirect consequences for nutrition may extend far beyond Ukraine; destruction of farmland and grainstorage facilities theft of grain and blockade of food exports will contribute to malnutrition in low and middleincome countries that depend on Ukrainian grain exports.
Rates of pregnancy complications maternal deaths premature and lowbirthweight infants and neonatal deaths will increase because of reduced access to maternal and infant care
The incidence of some noncommunicable diseases will increase and preexisting cases will be exacerbated because of limited access to medical care and essential medicines
Russian forces are also causing extensive environmental devastation
Explosions and fires are contaminating ambient air with toxic gases and particulate matter and threatening the integrity of nuclear reactors
Destruction of industrial facilities is contaminating water and soil with hazardous chemicals
Russian military activities in the Black Sea are reportedly causing extensive pollution and disruption of sea life
Deployment of antipersonnel land mines and cluster bombs and the presence of unexploded ordnance are presenting short and longterm health and safety threats.
The war has led to many documented violations of human rights and international humanitarian law that should be of grave concern to us all
Russian forces have targeted health care facilities schools and civilian neighborhoods
They have executed unarmed civilians
They have raped women
The Russian military has claimed to have deported to Russia 1.9 million Ukrainian civilians including 307000 children
Russia has wreaked widespread damage on cities towns farmland forests and water sources which will plague Ukraine long after the war ends.
On February 28 the International Criminal Court (ICC) announced its jurisdiction over potential war crimes in Ukraine relying on recent requests from its government
However the ICC in assuming jurisdiction over the international humanitarian law crime of aggressive war in 2018 stipulated that it apply only to signatory states to the Rome Statute
Neither Russia nor Ukraine is a signatory state
Prosecution for war crimes and restitution will be complex and probably take years to complete.
National and local government agencies in Ukraine and humanitarian assistance agencies of the United Nations and many countries have provided robust aid to civilians within Ukraine and in countries of refuge
These efforts have included protection of civilians; direct provision of food water shelter medical care and other humanitarian assistance; and support to Ukrainian government agencies and nongovernmental organizations that are caring for displaced populations and those choosing or forced to remain in their homes.
Many civilians chose to remain in their homes which became increasingly unsafe as Russian forces captured and executed civilians and bombarded civilian neighborhoods
In addition restricted access to food and safe water made it increasingly untenable for many Ukrainians to stay in place
Yet it was often impossible to establish safe corridors for civilians wishing to leave as demonstrated by widely reported fatal attacks on civilians in transit such as the bombing of the Kramatorsk train station in which at least 50 people died.
It has become exceedingly difficult to protect civilians who remain in their communities especially in eastern and southeastern Ukraine where Russian military forces have implemented scorchedearth strategies mainly with the longrange missile and shelling attacks that have destroyed Mariupol and many other cities and towns
These attacks have accelerated the killing of civilians and further damaged health care facilities and educational institutions.
Over the same period humanitarian assistance has greatly expanded and many countries are hosting Ukrainian refugees
Nevertheless since late April the conflict has become a war of attrition as Russia attempts to wear down Ukraine by slow relentless depletion of its resources including manpower supply chains and weaponry.5 This strategy now aims to inflict increasingly brutal losses with deployment of powerful weapons that kill indiscriminately often from great distances
While nations and their peoples take essential action to isolate this dangerous state we also believe that health professionals have responsibilities not only to respond to the needs of current victims but also to engage in preventing the devastating longlasting intergenerational effects of war on human health and life.
Individual graves are seen throughout the site some with names and numbers handwritten on the wooden crosses
One grave CNN saw had the number as high as 398
When CNN arrived to the mass burial site on Friday afternoon officials were transporting body bags including one that appeared to be holding something very small into a refrigerated truck.
Most graves at the burial site are individual graves with wooden crosses placed at the head of the dirt mounds
Some with names and numbers handwritten on them
One had a number as high as 398
Another with the name of an 82yearold man
One official at the site told CNN that investigations would have to determine when these people died.
Further down in the forest lies what appeared to be a former military position with tank positions dug deep into the ground.
A policeman at the scene told CNN that the spot is a mass grave where 17 bodies were found.
An Izium resident living across the street from the mass burial site told CNN the Russians first hit a nearby city graveyard with an airstrike and then moved in.
They dug some trenches for their vehicles
She said she tried not to go out during the time the city was under the Russian occupation because she was too scared.
Some background: Izium was subject to intense Russian artillery attacks in April
The city which sits near the border between the Kharkiv and Donetsk regions became an important hub for the invading military during five months of occupation
6 key numbers that reveal the staggering impact of Russias war in Ukraine
Today the holiday takes on new meaning for many Ukrainians as the country continues to fight in what it calls a new war for independence.
Over the course of six months the war has captured the worlds attention disrupted the global distribution of food and fuel and left the country reeling
To understand some of the wars impact on Ukraine here are six key numbers:
Over 13 million Ukrainians have been displaced
Russias invasion of Ukraine has prompted Europes largest refugee crisis since World War II
Since February more than 13 million people have been forced to flee their homes according to the United Nations refugee agency UNHCR
Nearly 6.7 million refugees have dispersed across Europe with Poland taking in the largest share
Another 6.6 million people are internally displaced within Ukraine.
Most Ukrainians who have fled the country are women and children as the government has barred men ages 18 to 60 from leaving
The European Unions migration department says almost 500000 Ukrainian children have been integrated into schools in EU countries.
Meanwhile as the war has stretched on and shifted course many Ukrainians are going back home
According to a survey by the International Organization for Migration 5.5 million previously displaced people have returned home.
Tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians may have lost their lives in the war
Both sides have reported losing military personnel since the invasion began in February
Exact figures are hard to come by since each country is reluctant to admit losses and often inflates the number of enemy fighters theyve killed.
Valeriy Zaluzhny commanderinchief of the Ukrainian Armed forces said this week at a public forum that Ukraine has lost 9000 military personnel
The Ukrainian military has also claimed to have killed or wounded 45200 Russian military personnel with the largest losses in the eastern Donetsk and southern Mykolaiv regions.
Meanwhile the U.N
human rights office has documented nearly 5600 civilians killed in Ukraine during the conflict but believes the actual toll is much higher.
Russia has been releasing scant information on military casualties
Officials there said 1351 of their own soldiers died in the first weeks of the war in March but have not released updated data since
Independent Russian news outlet iStories says it counted (through opensource information) more than 5000 Russian service members killed but that the true number could be higher.
In March Russian military officials estimated Ukrainian losses at around 14000 killed and 16000 out of action.
Russia occupies 20% of Ukrainian land
In 2014 Russia invaded and annexed the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine
Soon Russianbacked militants declared their intent to separate from Ukraine in the countrys far east launching a conflict thats been locked in a stalemate for nearly eight years.
In February Russians controlled around 17000 square miles of Ukrainian land according to Ukraines mission to the U.N
Six months into the fullscale invasion Russia has expanded its territory in Ukraine almost threefold
In June Ukraines President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said Russia has occupied 20% of the country or about 47000 square miles
Thats a territory about the size of New Hampshire Vermont Massachusetts Connecticut Rhode Island New Jersey Delaware and much of Maryland combined.
The line of contact between Russian and Ukrainian forces extends 570 miles as of Monday.
Dozens of countries have pledged billions of dollars in military aid since the war began
Dozens of countries have supplied Ukraine with military assistance including weapons systems and training
The bulk of the aid has come from the U.S
With President Bidens announcement Wednesday of another $3 billion Washington has now committed $10.6 billion in security aid since Russias February invasion
Billions more will be coming from an aid package passed in May.
On Ukrainian battlefields Australia has become synonymous with the 88 armored vehicles its provided Turkey is known for its roughly 80 combat drones Britain for the 22000 soldiers it trained
Other countries have offered logistical support like the 3.2 million gallons of diesel and jet fuel Slovakia provided.
When it comes to economic warfare EU member states plus another 18 countries have levied individual sanctions against Russia in the past six months
But experts warn the sanctions could have a limited effect on Russias export potential as twothirds of the worlds population is concentrated in the countries that have either stayed neutral or supported Russia according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.
Ukraines economy could shrink by as much as 45% because of the invasion
The invasion has devastated Ukraines economy across the board
The World Bank estimated in April that the Ukrainian economy could shrink by 45% this year
Last week Ukraines economy minister said the countrys gross domestic product of $200.9 billion in 2021 is likely to contract between 35% and 40% by the end of the year.
The conflict has cost Ukraine over $113.5 billion in damage the Kyiv School of Economics says with housing and transportation infrastructure hit particularly hard
KSE says the country will need upwards of $200 billion to recover.
And despite a U.N.brokered deal reached in July to allow food shipments to depart Ukraine the agriculture sector is still expected to take a huge hit
The countrys steel industry has also taken a beating.
Ukraine has lots of friends throughout the world who are trying to help keep its economy afloat
alone has already pledged $8.5 billion in financial assistance to Kyiv this year to keep government offices open and staffed and utilities working
Meanwhile the European Union has given billions of euros to Ukraine since February and has recently fashioned a package to give 8 billion euros more in financial aid over the next six months.
Bake sales spare change and St
Javelin have raised over $500 million in private money to help Ukraine
Enlarge this image toggle caption Oleksii Chumachenko-SOPA Images-LightRocket via Getty Images Oleksii Chumachenko-SOPA Images-LightRocket via Getty Images
In February a CanadianUkrainian writer Christian Borys and California artist Chris Shaw created a meme of a woman appearing like the Virgin Mary holding a rocket launcher
Borys called it St Javelin after the U.S.supplied antitank missiles
Since then hes formed the meme into a brand that has sold more than $3 million worth of stickers and other merchandise to help Ukraine.
Borys initiative is one of hundreds like it.
In June Ukrainian TV personality Serhiy Prytula asked his fans to buy him a Turkishmade drone priced at $5 million
He ended up raising $55 million
Baykar the company that makes the drone refused to take the money
Instead the company donated three drones
In August Prytula used the funds he raised to purchase a reconnaissance satellite for Ukrainian intelligence.
On Tuesday residents of the small western Ukrainian town of Dubno raised $866.55 at a bake sale and flea market for the military.
Julian Hayda reported from KamianetsPodilskyi Ashley Westerman from Lviv and Elissa Nadworny from Kyiv
Polina Lytvynova contributed to this report.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Jeff J Mitchell-Getty Images Jeff J Mitchell-Getty Images
As the week begins heres a roundup of key developments from the past week and a look ahead.
What to watch this week
Monday: A team from the International Atomic Energy Agency is on its way to visit the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant
The IAEAs director Rafael Mariano Grossi is leading the mission.
Also Monday Ukraine said it launched attacks against Russian forces in the south
Battles will be watched for signs of Ukraines anticipated counteroffenseive to retake areas such as the city of Kherson.
Tuesday: European Union defense ministers and foreign ministers will meet in an informal summit in Prague to continue through Wednesday
The foreign ministers are expected to decide on a proposed ban on Russian tourists.
Wednesday: Russias Vostok2022 military exercises will begin in the countrys east to continue through the week
China and India are among the countries expected to take part in the drills.
Thursday: The Venice Film Festival will host Ukrainian Day with a series of initiatives in support of Ukraine and its artists.
Friday: Russian journalist Dmitiri Muratov will join fellow Nobel laureates at a conference on freedom of expression in Oslo.
Sunday: German Chancellor Olaf Scholz will host Ukraines Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal for talks in Berlin.
What happened last week
The war in Ukraine has caused damage and destruction worth a total $113.5 billion according to an assessment by the Kyiv School of Economics along with Ukrainian government agencies and a number of other partners
Housing and transportation infrastructure made up the heaviest losses.
The German Interior Ministry reported that almost 1 million Ukrainian refugees have arrived in Germany since Russias invasion began in February
More than onethird are children and young people
There are some 6.6 million Ukrainians registered as refugees across Europe.
Ukraine marked Independence Day which coincided with the sixmonth anniversary of Russias invasion
On the same day a Russian rocket attack killed 22 people at a train station in the town of Chaplyne
And President Biden announced nearly $3 billion in U.S
The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant was temporarily cut off from Ukraines electrical grid  the latest point of concern around Europes largest nuclear plant which is under Russian occupation in southern Ukraine.
Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree to increase the size of Russian armed forces.
Officials handed out iodine tablets to residents near the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant in case of a radiation leak.
Putin issued further decrees giving people from eastern Ukraines Donbas region access to work and benefits in Russia.
The United States slammed Russia for blocking consensus on a final document reviewing the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty
In a statement a State Department spokesman said Russia refused to acknowledge language about the grave radiological risk at the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant in Ukraine.
Six key numbers that reveal the staggering impact of Russias war in Ukraine.
Kyiv hosts a different kind of parade to celebrate Ukraines independence day.
Once a heavyweight champion Kyivs mayor now fights the Russians.
Home is never far for the Ukrainian Freedom Orchestra even when touring in the U.S.
After a deadly jail blast Ukrainians want answers about war prisoners held by Russia.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
Earlier developments
You can read past recaps here
Supporters of Ukraine march in front of the White House in Lafayette Square on August 27 2022
The share of U.S adults who are extremely or very concerned about a Ukrainian defeat is down 17 percentage points since May falling from 55% then to 38% today
Roughly a quarter (26%) say they are not too concerned or not at all concerned about Russia defeating Ukraine up from 16% earlier this year
An additional 34% are somewhat concerned about this compared with 28% who said so in May according to a Pew Research Center survey among 10588 U.S
adults conducted Sept
For this analysis we surveyed 10588 U.S adults between September 13 and 18 2022
This way nearly all U.S adults have a chance of selection
The survey is weighted to be representative of the U.S
adult population by gender race ethnicity partisan affiliation education and other categories
Here are the questions used for this analysis along with responses and its methodology.
With the conflict front and center at the UN General Assembly meetings this week concern about the possibility of U.S
and NATO support for Ukraine leading to a broader war with Russia has also declined
Around a third of adults (32%) say they are extremely or very concerned about this down from 49% in May
A somewhat similar share (40%) express concern about the conflict leading to severe energy shortages in Europe this winter.
A quarter of adults currently say they are following news about the war extremely or very closely down from 36% in May.
Attitudes about U.S support for Ukraine
Only about twointen Americans (18%) now say the United States is not providing enough support to Ukraine in the conflict
This represents a stark shift from earlier in the war: In March just after the conflict began 42% said the U.S
was not providing enough support.
Nearly fourinten (37%) now say the U.S
About a quarter (24%) say they are not sure.
Threeinten Republicans and Republicanleaning independents currently say the U.S
is providing about the right among of support for Ukraine while a similar share (32%) say the U.S
is providing too much support
Just 16% now say it is not providing enough support
By contrast in March about half of Republicans (49%) said the U.S
was not providing enough support and just 9% said it was providing too much.
The share of Democrats and Democraticleaning independents who say the U.S
is not providing enough support to Ukraine has also declined falling to 20% from 38% in March
But only about oneinten Democrats (11%) now say the U.S
is providing too much support
More than fourinten Democrats (45%) say the U.S
is providing about the right amount of support to Ukraine up modestly from the share who said this in both March and May.
Partisan differences in concerns about the conflict
Democrats are more likely than Republicans to express a high level of concern about several possibilities that might arise from the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Democrats are also more likely than Republicans to be extremely or very concerned about Russia invading other countries in the region (47% vs 35%) severe energy shortages in Europe this winter (46% vs 36%) and Ukraine being defeated and taken over by Russia (45% vs
Democrats and Republicans express similar levels of concern about U.S and NATO support for Ukraine leading to a U.S
A third of Democrats and roughly the same share of Republicans (31%) are either extremely or very concerned about this.
Note: Here are the questions used for this analysis along with responses and its methodology.
Every day brought a sense of grave historic events and decisions that will not just decide who wins the biggest land war between two countries in Europe since World War II but will shape the course of the rest of the 21st century.
And the costs the threats to America and the world keep rising
Over just a few days a new realization dawned in Washington Europe Kyiv and Moscow
The war is now transitioning into a long bitter struggle which will likely cost thousands more lives and tens of billions of dollars
As these conflicting aims came into focus nuclear rhetoric heated up yet again with Russia keen to warn of the implied power of its vast arsenal and Washington trying to avoid an escalatory cycle that could lead to a direct superpower clash.
The carnage in Ukraine meanwhile goes on
Yet this week also brought the first signs that Russians accused of atrocities could face accountability.
An expanding war
Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin speak with reporters on April 25 2022 in Poland
A visit to Kyiv by Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin and Secretary of State Antony Blinken under a news blackout on Sunday set the stage for a week in which the West threw itself ever deeper into what looks like a proxy war with Russia.
Nuclear saber rattling
The strategic broadening of the war was accompanied by a new round of alarming nuclear rhetoric from Moscow.
Some US experts dismiss the Russia tough talk as a sign that Putin is frustrated by failing to fulfill his strategic goals in Ukraine
For the US the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen
Mark Milley told CNN that Russia should not be throwing such inflammatory rhetoric
We will use them if needed
This all caused Biden to warn about the danger of such rhetoric
The carnage gets worse
Local residents are seen outside an apartment building damaged in Mariupol on April 28 2022
Diplomacy goes cold
But neither side seems to see a rationale for talking right now
Guterres told CNN that Putin had agreed in principle to allow the UN and the International Red Cross to help evacuate citizens from the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol  the last bastion of Ukrainian resistance in the city.
The dispiriting reality at the end of a defining week for the West and Russia is that peace in Ukraine may be further away than it has been since the invasion
And while the West can send a torrent of arms ammunition and aid into the country it cannot end a war that will send painful and dangerous political military and economic shock waves around the world for months to come
Only Putin can do that.
The war will end when the Russian Federation decides to end it and when there is a serious political agreement
RussiaUkraine war: What happened today (June 22)
Enlarge this image toggle caption Oleksandr Gimanov-AFP via Getty Images Oleksandr Gimanov-AFP via Getty Images
As Wednesday draws to a close in Kyiv and in Moscow here are the key developments of the day:
The most intense battles in Ukraine are still taking place in the east but fighting has been picking up in the north and south of the country as well
Ukraines military says it carried out strikes against Russian positions on Snake Island an outpost in the Black Sea suggesting the use of longerrange weapons recently provided by Western countries
In northern Ukraine Russia has stepped up shelling of Kharkiv the countrys secondlargest city where Ukrainian officials say longrange Russian shelling has killed at least 15 civilians this week
Ukraine pushed back Russian troops from the outskirts of the city more than a month ago.
Ukrainian officials are gearing up to receive candidate status for the European Union
In their latest comments Ukrainian leaders including President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said they expected unanimous support of all EU members for Ukraine to be put on the lengthy path toward potential membership in the bloc
An EU summit begins in Brussels on Thursday.
The Kremlin threatened to retaliate against Lithuania for blocking some goods headed to Kaliningrad a Russian exclave on the Baltic Sea
A Russian Foreign Ministry spokesperson said the retaliation wouldnt be diplomatic but practical raising fears of a confrontation between Russia and NATO
Lithuania said it was banning the movement of goods like steel and other metals to the Russian territory as part of EU sanctions over Russias invasion of Ukraine.
Russia commemorated the 81st anniversary of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in World War II
Activists held candlelighting ceremonies across the country and according to Russian RIA new agency also in the occupied Ukrainian city of Mariupol
President Vladimir Putin laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier near the Kremlin in honor of the estimated 27 million Soviets killed in what Russia calls the Great Patriotic War
Russias invasion of Ukraine has created the largest refugee crisis since that time.
Microsoft reported that Russian statebacked hackers have targeted organizations in 42 countries allied with Ukraine
The report identified the U.S
as the top target followed by Poland a key logistics hub for aid to Ukraine
Hackers succeeded at infiltrating networks 29% of the time and at least a quarter of those intrusions resulted in stolen data
Microsoft said the key targets were governments but also included think tanks humanitarian groups IT companies and energy and other critical infrastructure suppliers.
Why volunteer grave diggers in Ukraine are exhuming Russias dead: Listen to this story.
As war drags on in Ukraine is it time to talk compromise? WBURs On Point examines the prospects.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
Earlier developments
You can read more daily recaps here
RussiaUkraine war: A weekly recap and look ahead (July 11)
As the week begins heres a roundup of key developments from the past week and a look ahead.
On Tuesday Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov will attend the opening of a Donetsk embassy in Moscow representing the Russianbacked selfproclaimed independent region that Ukraine and other countries refuse to recognize
Russia continues its push to capture Donetsk after already taking over the other large part of Ukraines eastern Donbas region Luhansk.
NATO SecretaryGeneral Jens Stoltenberg is scheduled to brief the European Parliaments defense and foreign affairs committees on Wednesday.
WNBA star Brittney Griners next court hearing is set to take place in Moscow on Thursday
She has admitted to bringing cannabis into Russia but said shed packed in a hurry and did not intend to break the law.
Russia may be planning to annex Kharkiv in northeastern Ukraine going beyond its stated aims of capturing regions such as Luhansk and Donetsk in the east U.S
security analysts said.
Ukraines government asked civilians to evacuate Russianoccupied Kherson as Ukrainian forces prepared a counterattack there.
What happened last week
July 4: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy confirmed that Russia had taken control of Lysychansk the last city in the eastern Luhansk region that had been under Ukrainian control
He vowed Ukraine would retake the city.
July 5: Global leaders and international organizations met in Lugano Switzerland to chart a way forward in supporting Ukraines recovery
Billed as the international kickoff for the recovery process in Ukraine the meeting adopted principles to aid the country in rebuilding from the war with Russia
Britain will host next years Ukraine Recovery Conference.
July 6: Russia and the U.S
trolled each other over the address of the U.S
Embassy in Moscow
Russian authorities renamed the street as Donetsk Peoples Republic Square. The U.S
Embassy responded by displaying geocoordinates as its address on its homepage while sticking to the previous Bolshoy Deviatinsky Pereulok street address on its other webpages.
Ukraine reinstalled the national flag on Snake Island after regaining control of the Black Sea island from Russian forces
Snake Island became a legendary symbol early in the war when Ukrainian troops there reportedly defied a Russian warships demand to surrender.
And Brittney Griner pleaded guilty to drug charges in a Moscow court last Thursday
basketball star also wrote a letter to President Biden asking for help
She was arrested in February just as Russia was preparing to invade Ukraine
The Biden administration says she is wrongfully detained and is working to get her home.
The Biden administration announced a $400 million military aid package for Ukraine including High Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems which Ukrainian officials say make a difference on the battlefield
The lightweight HIMARS mount on a truck and can reach targets up to 180 miles away.
Americas top diplomat told his Chinese counterpart the Biden administration is deeply concerned about Beijings alignment with Moscow
Secretary of State Antony Blinken rejected Chinas claim that its neutral over the RussiaUkraine war and said Beijings stance further complicates U.S.Chinese ties
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi blamed the U.S for the countries tensions and accused it of Chinaphobia.
A Russian rocket attack on Sunday killed at least 30 people in an apartment building in Chasiv Yar a town in Donetsk.
In eastern Ukraines coal fields Russias invasion sparks hopes of a comeback.
Ukrainians have a special place in their hearts for Boris Johnson.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has consolidated Ukraines TV outlets and dissolved rival political parties.
The last city in Luhansk has fallen to Russia
What does that mean for Ukraine?
Hardened by eight years of war many Ukrainians are staying put.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
As the week begins heres a roundup of key developments from the past week and a look ahead.
What to watch this week
Wednesday is Ukraines Independence Day marking 31 years since its declaration of independence from Soviet rule
Authorities have banned public celebrations in Kyiv and warned against gatherings around the country because of the risk of Russian attacks.
Wednesday also marks six months since the start of Russias largescale invasion of Ukraine on Feb
A trial for captured Ukrainian fighters is expected to begin in Russianoccupied Mariupol possibly as soon as Wednesday.
And on Thursday the Cluster Munition Monitor 2022 report will be released which will include research about cluster munition and land mine usage in the RussiaUkraine war.
What happened last week
United Nations human rights workers documented 5514 civilians killed and 7698 injured in Ukraine since the war began in February but said the actual figure is considerably higher as intense fighting delays reporting and corroboration
On the day of the U.N
update several more civilians were reported killed and wounded in Ukraine.
A Russianbacked separatist court in Donetsk charged men from the United Kingdom Sweden and Croatia with working as mercenaries for Ukraine
All five men pleaded not guilty Russias Tass news agency reported and three of them could face the death penalty.
Russian President Vladimir Putin said Moscow is ready to offer advanced weapons to Russias partners in Latin America Asia and Africa.
Explosions rocked Crimea hitting an ammunition depot an airfield a power station and also causing damage to the railway on the Russianannexed peninsula
Russias Defense Ministry called the blasts acts of sabotage
Ukraine didnt take credit but military analysts said the incidents are likely part of a Ukrainian counteroffensive
Later in the week Russian officials reported attempted drone attacks in Crimea.
Ukraines Parliament extended martial law for three more months.
SecretaryGeneral Ban Kimoon and former Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos a Nobel Peace Prize laureate were in Ukraine
They met with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and visited the town of Bucha outside Kyiv the site of mass civilian killings during the Russian invasion.
China announced it will send troops to Russia to participate in joint military exercises alongside the armed forces of India Belarus and other countries
Russia plans to hold the Vostok2022 drills from Aug
Burial ceremonies continued for victims of Bucha
Local authorities said 21 unidentified victims were buried on this day with numbers instead of names used to label their tombs.
President Zelenskyy hosted the head of the U.N
and president of Turkey discussing issues including the embattled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant and the deaths of war prisoners
Russia launched a barrage of rockets into the city of Kharkiv in northeastern Ukraine killing at least 17 civilians and destroying homes and a dormitory for deaf people.
Starbucks former flagship coffee shop in Moscow reopened under new ownership and a new but similar brand: Stars Coffee
The Russian coowners are restaurateur Anton Pinskiy and rapper Timati
The Seattlebased company announced its exit from Russia in May citing the countrys horrific attacks on Ukraine.
French President Emmanuel Macron had a phone call with Russian President Vladimir Putin
Macrons office said Putin agreed to allow an international mission of experts to assess reported damage at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in Russianoccupied southern Ukraine.
is sending weapons valued at $775 million to help Ukraine fight Russian forces in the southern part of the country thats become the main battleground the Defense Department said
The latest package includes drones antimine vehicles and antitank missiles.
Daria Dugina daughter of influential Russian nationalist theorist Alexander Dugin was killed in a car bombing on the outskirts of Moscow
Dugins allies and Russian media suggested he was the intended target
Russian authorities blamed Ukrainian agents for the killing; Ukraines government denied any role in the incident.
Ukraine installed a mockparade of bombedout Russian tanks and other military hardware on the street in Kyiv.
Russian forces pounded Nikopol a southern Ukrainian town near the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant and hit sites near Ukraines port of Odesa
Yet according to the U.S think tank the Institute for the Study of War Russian has continually failed to turn small tactical gains into operational successes.
President Biden spoke to the leaders of France Germany and the United Kingdom about supporting Ukraine and the concerning situation at the Zaporizhzhia plant Europes largest nuclear station in a Russiancontrolled area of southern Ukraine.
Over the river from a Russianoccupied nuclear plant a Ukrainian town fears a spill.
Ukraines first lady posed for Vogue and sparked discussion on how to #SitLikeAGirl.
The head of the WNBA players union talks about Brittney Griners ongoing detention.
Humanitarian groups prepare to send winter help to Ukrainians.
Examining the security of the Zaporizhzia nuclear power plant in Ukraine.
Demand for coal in Europe is rising amid Russias invasion of Ukraine.
Ukraines ambulance crews many of them volunteers put their lives on the line.
Ukraines rail system is working overtime to keep people and goods moving.
Unable to leave the country Ukrainian men worry about military drafts.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
Earlier developments
You can read past recaps here
Russian pop legend Alla Pugacheva looks on during a casting session for a musical television show on March 22 2011 in Moscow Russia
Galkin who is a comedian was labeled a foreign agent Friday by Russian authorities.
In an Instagram post the next day Galkin commented on the label.
Galkin and Pugacheva who have two children together left Russia for Israel in March according to multiple Russian and Israeli media reports
According to a social media post from a Russian fashion designer Pugacheva returned to Russia in August
It is not clear where she is now or where their family permanently resides.
Fugitive oligarch Viktor Medvedchuk sits in a chair with his hands cuffed after a special operation was carried out by Security Service of Ukraine on April 12
ProKremlin Ukrainian opposition politician Viktor Medvedchuk who was captured back in April is being exchanged with Russia as part of a prisoner swap according to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky.
Zelensky said 200 Ukrainian prisoners had returned home in exchange for Medvedchuk.
Five Ukrainian commanders were included in the prisoner swap as were 55 prisoners to be sent to Russia according to Zelensky.
According to Andrii Yermak head of the Office of the President of Ukraine a total of 215 prisoners of war have been released as part of an exchange of POWs between Russia and Ukraine including ten foreign prisoners.
Those fighters from the controversial Azov Battalion part of the National Guard of Ukraine which Russia has previously called neoNazis.
Yermak also said 10 foreigners were among those swapped.
The Coordinating Headquarters for the Treatment of Prisoners of War (CHTPW) a government institution under the Defense Intelligence said five British and two Americans are among the ten foreign prisoners.
Local officials in the Kharkiv region say the Ukrainian flag has been raised in settlements close to the Russian border confirming the continuing retreat of Russian forces in the area.
Oleksandr Kulik an official in Derhachi northeast of the city of Kharkiv said that the Ukrainian flag had been raised by local residents in the town of Kozacha Lopan.
Kozacha Lopan had been occupied by the Russians since March and was an administrative center for occupation authorities
It is five kilometers from the Russian border and has been extensively damaged during the conflict.
Tokarivka is also close to the Russian border.
People heard the roar of Russian military hardware
Kolodochka who is not in the town but maintains contacts there told CNN by phone that the Russians had left a lot of ammunition behind.
They searched for people who had been in the security forces confiscated phones and ransacked houses
She alleged they also beat and intimidated local residents.
Kolodochka said there had been no humanitarian aid until August when occupying forces provided some sugar and flour
She said people mainly survived on their own garden produce
She said she had left the town in April but her parents had stayed behind.
There are ten paralyzed old ladies
There are people with diabetes and asthma
They survive as best they can
She added that there was still great uncertainty about what will happen
Russia Ukraine war: What happened today (June 29)
Enlarge this image toggle caption Stefan Rousseau-WPA Pool-Getty Images Stefan Rousseau-WPA Pool-Getty Images
As Wednesday draws to a close in Kyiv and in Moscow here are the key developments of the day:
NATO formally invited Sweden and Finland to join the alliance in the most historic ripple effect of Russias invasion of Ukraine
On Tuesday Turkey had lifted its objections to the two countries membership
NATO also declared Russia the most significant and direct threat to its members.
said it would boost its military presence in Europe including a permanent army headquarters in Poland
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy addressed NATO leaders reiterating the countrys need for more weapons and aid.
Russian forces made incremental advances to encircle Lysychansk the last Ukrainiancontrolled town in the eastern Luhansk region according to Britains defense ministry
The agency also called it a realistic possibility that Russias deadly missile strike on a shopping mall in Kremenchuk on Monday was intended to hit nearby infrastructure.
Ukrainian authorities said 144 of the countrys soldiers have returned in a prisoner swap with Russia
Of those released 95 are fighters who defended the Azovstal steel plant in the besieged port city of Mariupol which Russian troops captured in May.
The United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights released a report concluding that Russias invasion of Ukraine has created disastrous consequences for the civilian population and had a devastating impact on the enjoyment of human rights notably their rights to life security health food water education and housing. The U.N
has documented more than 10000 civilian casualties since the war began in February.
War in Ukraine is driving demand for Africas natural gas
Thats controversial.
How different is the war coverage in the U.S
versus Ukraine? NPRs 1A talks with the executive director for The Aspen Institute Kyiv.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
Earlier developments
You can read more daily recaps here
Europe Ukraine Six months of war in Ukraine The conflict has turned into one of attrition
It began on February 24th with volleys of cruise missiles artillery and other weapons
The scope of the attack was not immediately clear but all the evidence pointed to a largescale operation
Six months later  Russian forces have failed to capture much of the country having been pushed back to the east and south of Ukraine
The conflict has turned into a war of attrition
Ukrainian and Russian losses have been severe but neither side looks likely to make a decisive breakthrough soon
These maps and images recall some of the most important moments of the war in the past six months.
February 24th The invasion begins
NATO pull back from eastern Europe and rule out Ukraine joining the alliance but diplomacy had stalled
Russia had demanded thatpull back from eastern Europe and rule out Ukraine joining the alliance but diplomacy had stalled
It was the largest military buildup in Europe since the cold war
Within minutes explosions were heard near the main airport of Kyiv the capital as well as in many other cities
Cruise missiles sliced through the air and slammed into buildings
Armoured forces then began rolling from Russia and Belarus as well as Crimea to the south.
March 23rd Russia falters following early gains
In the early weeks of the war Russian forces had hoped to make swift progress
At first this seemed assured
They almost surrounded Kyiv and took Kherson a city in the south
By the end of March the pincer movement on the capital from the northwest and northeast had stalled in the face of staunch Ukrainian resistance jammedup supply lines and a shortage of manpower
Russia quickly announced that its war aims had changed
Having failed to take Kyiv Russia refocused on the east.
April 3rd Evidence of war crimes emerges
The Economist was able to verify reports of what appears to have been a summary execution
It also launched retaliatory strikes on Ukraine
Ukraine quickly claimed it as a scalp
It also launched retaliatory strikes on Ukraine.
May Mariupol counts the heavy cost of resistance
By May the focus of the war had moved to the Donbas region in the east where Russia continued to make gains
On May 16th its forces captured Mariupol  a port city of 400000 people that had been under siege and constant bombardment
Authorities claimed that the eventual civilian death toll was more than 20000
June Ukraine begs the West for weapons
Image: Ukraine Defence Ministry
NATO  has strategic importance
It could also serve as a bridgehead for an amphibious attack on Odessa
But Russia continued to make gains in Donbas where the fighting is concentrated
In June Ukraine received the first four HIMARS ) from America
They have proved Ukraine wrested back control of Snake Island  a small Russianoccupied fortress in the Black Sea after an assault that lasted ten days
The victory was not just symbolic; the island only 45km from Romania a member of has strategic importance
It could also serve as a bridgehead for an amphibious attack on Odessa
But Russia continued to make gains in Donbas where the fighting is concentrated
By the fifth month of fighting the war was showing signs of settling into stalemate
A limited counteroffensive by Ukraine started in the south
The Russian advance was slow and costly
August 24th Ukraine talks up a counteroffensive
For months Ukrainian officials have hinted that an attack in the south is imminent
Kherson the city taken by Russia early in the war would be liberated by the end of the year boasted Dmytro Marchenko a Ukrainian general
Such lofty expectations will be hard to meet
Meanwhile the impact on the wider world continues most notably on the skyhigh gas prices
Europe is preparing for Russian gas to be cut off this winter
But food prices have started to fall from their wardriven peak helped in part by a deal to allow the resumption of Ukrainian grain exports
Half a year into the fighting a long war looks ever more likely.
Sources: The Economist
The conflict is a major blow to the global economy that will hurt growth and raise prices.
Impacts will flow through three main channels
One higher prices for commodities like food and energy will push up inflation further in turn eroding the value of incomes and weighing on demand
Two neighboring economies in particular will grapple with disrupted trade supply chains and remittances as well as an historic surge in refugee flows
And three reduced business confidence and higher investor uncertainty will weigh on asset prices tightening financial conditions and potentially spurring capital outflows from emerging markets.
Russia and Ukraine are major commodities producers and disruptions have caused global prices to soar especially for oil and natural gas
Food costs have jumped with wheat for which Ukraine and Russia make up 30 percent of global exports reaching a record.
Beyond global spillovers countries with direct trade tourism and financial exposures will feel additional pressures
Economies reliant on oil imports will see wider fiscal and trade deficits and more inflation pressure though some exporters such as those in the Middle East and Africa may benefit from higher prices.
Steeper price increases for food and fuel may spur a greater risk of unrest in some regions from SubSaharan Africa and Latin America to the Caucasus and Central Asia while food insecurity is likely to further increase in parts of Africa and the Middle East.
Gauging these reverberations is hard but we already see our growth forecasts as likely to be revised down next month when we will offer a fuller picture in our World Economic Outlook and regional assessments.
Longer term the war may fundamentally alter the global economic and geopolitical order should energy trade shift supply chains reconfigure payment networks fragment and countries rethink reserve currency holdings
Increased geopolitical tension further raises risks of economic fragmentation especially for trade and technology.
The toll is already immense in Ukraine
Unprecedented sanctions on Russia will impair financial intermediation and trade inevitably causing a deep recession there
Energy is the main spillover channel for Europe as Russia is a critical source of natural gas imports
Wider supplychain disruptions may also be consequential
These effects will fuel inflation and slow the recovery from the pandemic
Eastern Europe will see rising financing costs and a refugee surge
It has absorbed most of the 3 million people who recently fled Ukraine United Nations data show.
European governments also may confront fiscal pressures from additional spending on energy security and defense budgets.
While foreign exposures to plunging Russian assets are modest by global standards pressures on emerging markets may grow should investors seek safer havens
Similarly most European banks have modest and manageable direct exposures to Russia.
Caucasus and Central Asia
Close trade and paymentsystem links will curb trade remittances investment and tourism adversely affecting economic growth inflation and external and fiscal accounts.
While commodity exporters should benefit from higher international prices they face the risk of reduced energy exports if sanctions extend to pipelines through Russia.
Middle East and North Africa
Major ripple effects from higher food and energy prices and tighter global financial conditions are likely
Egypt for example imports about 80 percent of its wheat from Russia and Ukraine
And as a popular tourist destination for both it will also see visitor spending shrink.
Policies to contain inflation such as raising government subsidies could pressure already weak fiscal accounts
In addition worsening external financing conditions may spur capital outflows and add to growth headwinds for countries with elevated debt levels and large financing needs.
Rising prices may raise social tensions in some countries such as those with weak social safety nets few job opportunities limited fiscal space and unpopular governments.
SubSaharan Africa
Just as the continent was gradually recovering from the pandemic this crisis threatens that progress
The conflict comes when most countries have minimal policy space to counter the effects of the shock
This is likely to intensify socioeconomic pressures public debt vulnerability and scarring from the pandemic that was already confronting millions of households and businesses.
Record wheat prices are particularly concerning for a region that imports around 85 percent of its supplies onethird of which comes from Russia or Ukraine.
Western Hemisphere
Food and energy prices are the main channel for spillovers which will be substantial in some cases
High commodity prices are likely to significantly quicken inflation for Latin America and the Caribbean which already faces an 8 percent average annual rate across five of the largest economies: Brazil Mexico Chile Colombia and Peru
Central banks may have to further defend inflationfighting credibility.
Growth effects of costly commodities vary
Higher oil prices hurt Central American and Caribbean importers while exporters of oil copper iron ore corn wheat and metals can charge more for their products and mitigate the impact on growth.
Financial conditions remain relatively favorable but intensifying conflict may cause global financial distress that with tighter domestic monetary policy will weigh on growth.
The United States has few ties to Ukraine and Russia diluting direct effects but inflation was already at a fourdecade high before the war boosted commodity prices
That means prices may keep rising as the Federal Reserve starts raising interest rates.
Asia and the Pacific
Spillovers from Russia are likely limited given the lack of close economic ties but slower growth in Europe and the global economy will take a heavy toll on major exporters.
The biggest effects on current accounts will be in the petroleum importers of ASEAN economies India and frontier economies including some Pacific Islands
This could be amplified by declining tourism for nations reliant on Russian visits.
Still commodity prices and weakening demand in big export markets add to challenges.
Spillovers are similar for Japan and Korea where new oil subsidies may ease impacts
While some effects may not fully come into focus for many years there are already clear signs that the war and resulting jump in costs for essential commodities will make it harder for policymakers in some countries to strike the delicate balance between containing inflation and supporting the economic recovery from the pandemic.
And I will explain why
The world produces about 800 million tons of wheat per year
We are told that Ukraine is ready to export 20 million tons
Two weeks after Russia invaded Ukraine the prices of key agricultural products produced in the region have skyrocketed
The biggest problem is wheat a pantry staple
Supplies from Russia and Ukraine which together account for almost 30% of global wheat trade are now at risk
Global wheat prices hit an alltime high earlier this week.
At the same time Russia also appears to be ramping up its efforts to steal large quantities of Ukrainian grain as CNN has previously reported
Russian forces are also stealing farm equipment and thousands of tons of grain from Ukrainian farmers in areas they have occupied as well as targeting food storage sites with artillery multiple sources have told CNN.
Russian units have tightened their grip on parts of the rich agricultural regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in southern Ukraine the sources said
Sowing operations in many areas have since been disrupted or abandoned.
Ukraine has accused the Russians of placing mines in the Black Sea.
Putin also said that Russia has almost completed demining of the Ukranian ports under its occupation.
These are through the ports of the Sea of Azov  Berdyansk Mariupol which are under our control
This week for the first time since the Russian invasion a merchant ship left Mariupol for the Russian port of RostovonDon.
Putin also said that Russia is ready to increase its own grain exports to 50 million tons in 20222023.
As the war drags on these digital ecosystems have become inundated with disinformation
Strategic propaganda campaigns including those peddling disinformation are by no means new during warfare but the shift toward social media as the primary distribution channel is transforming how information warfare is waged as well as who can participate in ongoing conversations to shape emerging narratives.
Examining the underlying dynamics of how information and disinformation are impacting the war in Ukraine is crucial to making sense of and working toward solutions to the current conflict
To that end this FP Analytics brief uncovers three critical components:
How social media platforms are being leveraged to spread competing national narratives and disinformation;
The role of artificial intelligence (AI) in promoting and potentially combating disinformation; and
The role of social media companies and government policies on limiting disinformation.
The Role of Social Media and National Disinformation Campaigns
Russia and Ukraine both use social media extensively to portray their versions of the events unfolding and amplify contrasting narratives about the war including its causes consequences and continuation
Government officials individual citizens and state agencies and have all turned to an array of platforms including Facebook Twitter TikTok YouTube and Telegram to upload information
It is difficult to pinpoint the exact amount of content uploaded by these various actors but the scale of information being uploaded on social media about the war is immense
For instance in just the first week of the war videos from a range of sources on TikTok with the tag #Russia and #Ukraine had amassed 37.2 billion and 8.5 billion views respectively.
At their core the narratives presented by Russia and Ukraine are diametrically opposed
Ukraine and Russia are not the only state actors interested and engaged in portraying the war on their own terms
Countries such as China and Belarus have engaged in efforts to portray the conflict on their own terms and they have launched coordinated disinformation campaigns on social media platforms
and antiNATO posts
Data sources: DataReportal WIRED TIME FP Insider Graphics Database
The scale of information uploaded to social media and the speed with which it proliferates create novel and complex challenges to combating disinformation campaigns
It is often hard to identify the origin of a campaign or its reach complicating efforts to remove false content in bulk or identify false posts before they reach mass audiences
Before the operation was uncovered in July 2021 it effectively hacked the social media accounts of European political figures and news outlets and spread fabricated content critical of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) across Eastern Europe
The level of sophistication that these types of modern statebacked disinformation campaigns possess makes them exceedingly difficult to detect early and counter effectively
Russia in particular has spent decades developing a propaganda ecosystem of official and proxy communication channels which it uses to launch widereaching disinformation campaigns
Data sources: WIRED New York Times Intellinews The Economist Coda Story FP Insider Graphics Database
Russians are Using VPNs to Access Restricted Websites Russia banned over 2384 websites since the start of the war propelling a rapid increase in VPN downloads
The range of social media platforms in use and the variation in their availability across different countries hinders the ability to coordinate efforts to combat disinformation while creating different information ecosystems across geographies
The narratives about the war emerging on social media take different forms depending on the platform and the region including within Russia and Ukraine
Within Russia YouTube and TikTok are still accessible to everyday citizens but with heavy censorship
It was previously available and widely used in Ukraine until 2017 but the Ukrainian government blocked access to VK and other Russian social media such as Yandex in an effort to combat online Russian propaganda
In 2020 Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy extended the ban on VK until 2023 so it has not facilitated communications between Russians and Ukrainians throughout the war this year.
The governmentimposed restrictions placed on these major social media platforms leave Telegram as the main social media platform currently accessible to both Russians and Ukrainians
Telegram is an encrypted messaging service created and owned by Russian tech billionaire Pavel Durov which is being used in the war for everything from connecting Ukrainian refugees to opportunities for safe passage to providing nearrealtime videos of events on the battlefield
Critically in the fight against disinformation Telegram has no official policies in place to censor or remove content of any nature
While some channels on Telegram have been shut down the company does not release official statements on why and it generally allows the majority of content posted by users to continue circulating regardless of its nature
This allows Telegram to serve as a mostly unfiltered source of disinformation within Russia and Ukraine and reaches audiences that Western social media platforms have been cut off from
While Telegram does not filter content like many other platforms it also does not use an algorithm to boost certain posts and it relies on direct messaging between users
This design makes it difficult for AI tools to effectively boost disinformation
In contrast on other platforms such as Twitter and Facebook AI is further enabling the rapid spread of disinformation about the war.
How Russias current war in Ukraine echoes its Crimean War of the 1850s
It didnt think Western powers would intervene
Yet a poorly planned military campaign led to a fight much tougher than expected.
To be clear were not talking about Russias current war in Ukraine
Were talking about Russias war in Crimea in the 1850s.
Even if youre not familiar with the Crimean War you know some of the monumental figures who emerged from it like Florence Nightingale and Leo Tolstoy.
But this isnt just history
That longago conflict is still relevant today
That vast state is in great measure composed of spoils which she has torn from surrounding nations The Economist wrote
Her frontier provinces are filled with injured discontented hostile populations ..
many of whom wait with patience and desire the blessed day of emancipation and revenge.
Sounds a lot like Ukraine today.
There are very distinct parallels
And I think Putin has probably overstretched himself in the same way that Nicholas I did says Orlando Figes a British historian and the author of The Crimean War: A History.
Nicholas who wanted to counteract the influence of liberal democracy in Europe came up with the slogan Orthodoxy autocracy nationalism says Figes whos upcoming book is The Story of Russia
That might just as well stand for Putins ideology
This is a war backed by the Orthodox Church
He is an autocrat
He sees himself as a bulwark against liberal principles coming from the West.
Professor Vladislav Zubok a Russian historian at the London School of Economics has a similar take.
Its a classic case when history does definitely rhyme says Zubok.
He notes that Russia had a huge army in the 1850s but planned poorly for the Crimean War.
Very quickly after the outbreak of the war it turned out that Russia was so weak that it couldnt even properly supply the troops on its own territory Zubok says.
Much like today where Russia has suffered recurring logistics failures since invading Ukraine in February.
Nicholas I also thought Western powers would not interfere with his war against the Ottoman Empire which he called the sick man of Europe. He was stunned when Britain and France joined the fight against Russia.
He could not imagine that the leading powers of Europe would turn against him Zubok says
He definitely provoked the Crimean War by his arrogance by his wrong assumptions about Europe and other powers
And he essentially blundered his way into this war.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Roger Fenton-Universal History Archive-Getty Images Roger Fenton-Universal History Archive-Getty Images
Britain and France arent fighting in the current war
But recently British Prime Minister Boris Johnson and French President Emmanuel Macron were among five European leaders who took trains to Kyiv and stood sidebyside in solidarity with Ukraines President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
Putin did not believe that the Europeans and the United States would together push back against what Russia was doing says Angela Stent a Russia expert at Georgetown University
Shes met many times with Putin during his more than two decades in power and is the author of Putins World.
He also didnt believe that Europe and the United States would agree on these very tough sanctions
So he was wrong on a number of counts she adds.
Enlarge this image toggle caption HUM Images-Universal Images Group via Getty Images HUM Images-Universal Images Group via Getty Images
Of course the Crimean War was also filled with folly
A disastrous British military operation was immortalized by Britains Alfred Lord Tennyson in his epic poem the Charge of the Light Brigade which includes these enduring lines:
Tennyson wasnt alone in turning tragedy into art
A young Russian artillery officer Leo Tolstoy drew on his experience when he later wrote War and Peace.
And Florence Nightingale became one of the most famous women in the world as she ushered in a new era of military medicine by using more sanitary methods to treat wounded troops.
Decades later in 1890 she made a recording about her time in Crimea and the place where she set up her field hospital Balaklava.
God bless my dear old comrades of Balaklava and bring them safe to shore.
The war did however further damage the reputation of Nicholas I
He died in 1855 while the fighting still raged
His 30year rule left Russia isolated impoverished and badly in need of reforms.
Russia lost the Crimean War a year later and was forced to accept humiliating terms.
Today Russia is projecting naval power in the Black Sea
In an escalating crisis some 20 Russian warships are blockading the southern coast of Ukraine keeping the country from exporting its abundant grain to the world.
I think this is again a historical continuity says Georgetowns Stent
Russia trying to dominate the Black Sea
The goals havent changed that much.
Russia has long portrayed itself as a leading military power
Putin recently compared himself to Peter the Great the czar who expanded Russian territory through conquests in the early 1700s.
So its current invasion of Ukraine comes as no surprise to Volodymyr Viatrovych a prominent Ukrainian historian.
This is of course an imperial war says Viatrovych whos also in Ukraines parliament and is a member of the armed forces who helped defend Kyiv in the early days of this war.
Russia today acts as an empire
It is intending to expand
Theyre trying to take land that they perceived to have belonged to them in the past he says.
While Russia has had many military triumphs he says its overall record is decidedly mixed.
If we look throughout the course of history not only the 20th century but also the 19th century Russia lost more than it won Viatrovych says.
Russia was part of the winning side in World War II
Russia has really built this myth of being a global superpower says Viatrovych
But what weve seen since the invasion of Ukraine is that they are not a superpower.
Russias current leader loves talking about his countrys historical conquests
Hes much less forthcoming on its defeats.
As the week begins heres a roundup of key developments from the past week and a look ahead.
Also on Tuesday European Union energy ministers are scheduled to meet in Brussels on gas supply issues.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov is visiting countries in Africa including Ethiopia Uganda the Republic of Congo and Egypt where he addressed Arab League leaders in Cairo.
Russians will mark a national holiday honoring the countrys navy on Sunday.
What happened last week
Ukraines first lady Olena Zelenska began a trip to Washington where she met with Secretary of State Antony Blinken and first lady Jill Biden and delivered remarks to U.S
Russian President Vladimir Putin visited Tehran where he met with Iranian leaders and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan
Iran expressed support for Russia in the Ukraine war
It was Putins second trip outside Russia since his country invaded Ukraine on Feb
Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin announced the U.S
will send four more longrange artillery systems known as HIMARS to Ukraine as part of a U.S
military aid package
has already sent 12 such systems.
Russia attacked Kharkiv Ukraines secondbiggest city in one of its most crowded areas the citys mayor said
At least three people were killed and more than 20 injured.
On the same day Russia restarted natural gas flows to Europe via the Nord Stream pipeline
Maintenance work had paused gas shipments for 10 days.
In Istanbul Russia and Ukraine finalized agreements with Turkey and the United Nations to unblock Ukraines seaports and resume exports of Ukrainian grain via the Black Sea
The agreements also would help Russian grain and fertilizer to reach global markets the U.N
At the signing ceremony U.N
in a world that needs it more than ever.
Also on Friday Human Rights Watch released a report on apparent war crimes committed by Russian forces in areas of southern Ukraine under their control.
Russian air strikes hit Odesas port eliciting international condemnation and raising doubts about Russias commitment to the previous days agreements
Russia breached its commitments Blinken said.
Sunday marked five months since Russia invaded Ukraine
The Ukrainian Seaports Authority said it was working to resume shipping from seaports in Odesa and elsewhere.
As Ukraines war grinds on soldiers are outgunned and injuries are rising.
The bombed Mariupol theater troupe is back on stage with a homegrown Ukrainian play.
How prosecuting war crimes in Ukraine compares to hunting Nazis.
Cafes are opening in Kharkiv but most large Ukrainian businesses remain shuttered.
Russias war in Ukraine is hurting nature.
Russias war in Ukraine is changing the world: See its ripple effects in all corners of the globe.
You can read past recaps here
Unidentified makeshift graves are seen at the Pishanske cemetery in Izium on Friday
A total of 436 bodies have been exhumed from a mass burial site in Izium according to Oleh Syniehubov head of the Kharkiv region military administration who said the work was completed Friday.
Most of the bodies showed signs of violent death and 30 had traces of torture Syiehubov said in a post on Telegram.
Several men had their genitals amputated
All this is evidence of the terrible torture to which the occupiers subjected the residents of Izium
Syniehubov added that there were at least three more mass burial sites in other liberated areas of the Kharkiv region.
Some background: Izium was subject to intense Russian artillery attacks in April
The city which sits near the border between the Kharkiv and Donetsk regions became an important hub for the invading military during five months of occupation
Ukrainian forces took back control of the city on Sept
The Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant seen on Sunday
Kotin reiterated that when there is no external power supply the diesel generators could kick in
But we understand that it is very difficult to bring anything in there
